::

  ZIP: 216
  Title: Require Canonical Jubjub Point Encodings
  Owners: Jack Grigg <thestr4d@gmail.com>
          Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira@jacaranda.org>
  Status: Final
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2021-02-11
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/400>


Terminology
===========

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in
ZIP 200. [#zip-0200]_

The terms "settled" and "full validator" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [#protocol-blockchain]_.

The terms "Mainnet" and "Testnet" in this document are to be interpreted as described
in [#protocol-networks]_.


Abstract
========

This ZIP fixes an oversight in the implementation of the Sapling consensus rules, by
rejecting all non‑canonical representations of Jubjub points.


Motivation
==========

The Sapling specification was originally written with the intent that all values, including
Jubjub points, are strongly typed with canonical representations. [#protocol-jubjub]_ This
has significant advantages for security analysis, because it allows the protocol to be
modelled with just the abstract types.

The intention of the Jubjub implementation (both in the `jubjub` crate [#jubjub-crate]_
and its prior implementations) was to ensure that only canonical point encodings would be
accepted by the decoding logic. However, an oversight in the implementation allowed an
edge case to slip through: for each point on the curve where the $u$-coordinate is
zero, there are two encodings that will be accepted:

.. code-block:: rust

   // Fix the sign of `u` if necessary
   let flip_sign = Choice::from((u.to_bytes()[0] ^ sign) & 1);
   let u_negated = -u;
   let final_u = Fq::conditional_select(&u, &u_negated, flip_sign);

This code accepts either sign bit, because ``u_negated == u``.

There are two points on the Jubjub curve with $u$-coordinate zero:

- $(0, 1)$, which is the identity;
- $(0, -1)$, which is a point of order two.

Each of these has a single non‑canonical encoding in which the value of the sign bit is
$1$.

This creates a consensus issue because (unlike other non‑canonical point encodings that
are rejected) either of the above encodings can be decoded, and then re-encoded to a
*different* encoding. For example, if a non‑canonical encoding appeared in a transaction
field, then node implementations that store points internally as abstract curve points,
and used those to derive transaction IDs, would derive different IDs than nodes which
store transactions as bytes (such as `zcashd`).

This issue is not known to cause any security vulnerability, beyond the risk of
consensus incompatibility. In fact, for some of the fields that would otherwise be
affected, the issue does not occur because there are already consensus rules that
prohibit small‑order points, and this incidentally prohibits non‑canonical encodings.

Adjustments to the protocol specification were made in versions 2020.1.8, 2020.1.9,
2020.1.15, 2021.1.17, and 2023.4.0 to match the `zcashd` implementation. Further
changes were also made in version 2025.6.0. The fact that this required six
specification revisions to get right, conclusively demonstrates the problem.


Specification
=============

Let $\mathsf{abst}_{\mathbb{J}}$, $\mathsf{repr}_{\mathbb{J}}$, and
$q_{\mathbb{J}}$ be as defined in [#protocol-jubjub]_.

Define a non‑canonical compressed encoding of a Jubjub point to be a sequence of
$256$ bits, $b$, such that $\mathsf{abst}_{\mathbb{J}}(b) \neq \bot$
and $\mathsf{repr_{\mathbb{J}}}\big(\mathsf{abst}_{\mathbb{J}}(b)\big) \neq b$.

Non‑normative note: There are two such bit sequences,
$\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{\ell_{\mathbb{J}}}(2^{255} + 1)$ and
$\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{\ell_{\mathbb{J}}}(2^{255} + q_{\mathbb{J}} - 1)$.
The Sapling protocol uses little‑endian ordering when converting between bit and
byte sequences, so the first of these sequences corresponds to a $\mathtt{0x01}$
byte, followed by $30$ zero bytes, and then a $\mathtt{0x80}$ byte.

Once this ZIP activates, the following places within the Sapling consensus protocol
where Jubjub points occur MUST reject non‑canonical Jubjub point encodings.

In Sapling Spend descriptions [#protocol-spenddesc]_:

  - the $\underline{R}$ component (i.e. the first $32$ bytes) of the
    $\mathtt{spendAuthSig}$ RedDSA signature.

In transactions [#protocol-txnencoding]_:

  - the $\underline{R}$ component (i.e. the first $32$ bytes) of the
    $\mathtt{bindingSigSapling}$ RedDSA signature.

In the plaintext obtained by decrypting the $\mathsf{C^{out}}$ field of a
Sapling transmitted note ciphertext (encrypted in [#protocol-saplingandorchardencrypt]_
and decrypted in [#protocol-decryptovk]_):

  - $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$.

$\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ also MUST be considered invalid if it encodes the zero point
$\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$.

These requirements on $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ affect the decryption of
$\mathsf{C^{out}}$ in all cases, but are consensus-critical only in the case
of decrypting $\mathsf{C^{out}}$ for a Sapling shielded coinbase output.
[#protocol-txnconsensus]_ [#zip-0213]_

Note: When a Sapling transmitted note ciphertext is decrypted using an incoming
viewing key [#protocol-decryptivk]_, $\mathsf{pk_d}$ is computed as
$\mathsf{KA^{Sapling}.DerivePublic}(\mathsf{ivk}, \mathsf{g_d}) =$ $[\mathsf{ivk}]\,\mathsf{g_d}$.
Since $\mathsf{g_d}$ is an output of
$\mathsf{DiversifyHash^{Sapling}} \;{\small ⦂}\; \mathbb{B}^{[\ell_d]} \rightarrow \mathbb{J}^{(r)*} \cup \{\bot\}$,
it cannot be $\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$. $\mathsf{ivk}$ cannot be $0$ for a validly
constructed Sapling incoming viewing key [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents]_, and
so the computed value of $\mathsf{pk_d}$ cannot be $\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$.
An implementation MAY redundantly enforce that the computed value of $\mathsf{pk_d}$
is not $\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$.

There are some additional fields in the consensus protocol that encode Jubjub points,
but where non‑canonical encodings MUST already be rejected as a side effect of
existing consensus rules.

In Sapling Spend descriptions:

  - $\mathtt{cv}$
  - $\mathtt{rk}$.

In Sapling Output descriptions [#protocol-outputdesc]_:

  - $\mathtt{cv}$
  - $\mathtt{ephemeralKey}$.

These fields cannot by consensus contain small‑order points. All of the points
with non‑canonical encodings are small‑order.

Implementations MAY choose to reject non‑canonical encodings of the above four
fields early in decoding of a transaction. This eliminates the risk that parts
of the transaction could be re-serialized from their internal representation to a
different byte sequence than in the original transaction, e.g. when calculating
transaction IDs.

In addition, Sapling addresses and full viewing keys MUST be considered invalid when
imported if they contain non‑canonical Jubjub point encodings, or encodings of points
that are not in the prime‑order subgroup $\mathbb{J}^{(r)}$. These requirements
\MAY be enforced in advance of NU5 activation. This affects the fields listed below.

In Sapling payment addresses [#protocol-saplingpaymentaddrencoding]_:

  - the encoding of $\mathsf{pk_d}$.

In Sapling full viewing keys [#protocol-saplingfullviewingkeyencoding]_ and extended
full viewing keys [#zip-0032-extfvk]_:

  - the encoding of $\mathsf{ak}$
  - the encoding of $\mathsf{nk}$.

$\mathsf{pk_d}$ and $\mathsf{ak}$ also MUST be considered invalid if they encode the
zero point $\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$.

The fields mentioned in this Specification are intended to be a complete list of the
places where compressed encodings of Jubjub points occur in the Zcash consensus protocol
and in plaintext, address, or key formats.

Note: Some versions of the Zcash protocol specification mistakenly allowed $\mathsf{pk_d}$
in a Sapling payment address, or $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ in a decrypted $\mathsf{C^{out}}$,
to encode the zero point. The history is explained in a note added in version 2023.4.0 of
the protocol specification [#protocol-2023.4.0]_:

  A previous version of this specification did not have the requirement for the decoded point
  $\mathsf{pk_d}$ of a Sapling note to be in the set of prime‑order points $\mathbb{J}^{(r)*}$
  (i.e. "if ... $\mathsf{pk_d} \not\in \mathbb{J}^{(r)*}$, return $\bot\!$").
  That did not match the implementation in `zcashd`. In fact the history is a little more
  complicated. The current specification matches the implementation in `librustzcash` as of
  [#librustzcash-pr109]_, which has been used in `zcashd` since v2.1.2. However, there was
  another implementation of Sapling note decryption used in `zcashd` for consensus checks,
  specifically the check that a shielded coinbase output decrypts successfully with the
  zero $\mathsf{ovk}$. This was corrected to enforce the same restriction on the decrypted
  $\mathsf{pk_d}$ in `zcashd` v5.5.0, originally set to activate in a soft fork at block
  height 2121200 on both Mainnet and Testnet [#zcashd-pr6459]_. (On Testnet this height was
  in the past as of the `zcashd` v5.5.0 release, and so the change would have been immediately
  enforced on upgrade.) Since the soft fork was observed to be retrospectively valid after
  that height, the implementation was simplified in [#zcashd-pr6725]_ to use the
  `librustzcash` implementation in all cases, which reflects the specification above.
  `zebra` always used the `librustzcash` implementation.

The protocol specification was further updated in version 2025.6.0 [#protocol-2025.6.0]_,
to tighten the type of $\mathsf{ivk}$ in Sapling to
$\{ 1\,..\, 2^{\ell^{\mathsf{Sapling}}_{\mathsf{ivk}}}\!-1 \}$ and the type of $\mathsf{pk_d}$
in both Sapling and Orchard to $\mathsf{KA^{protocol}.PublicPrimeOrder}$, in order to make
the exclusion of the zero point more obvious [#zips-issue664]_. This also has the effect
that a Sapling incoming viewing key [#protocol-saplinginviewingkeyencoding]_ or a Sapling
IVK Encoding in a Unified Incoming Viewing Key [#zip-0316]_ that encodes the zero
$\mathsf{ivk}$ MUST be considered invalid when imported. Another note was also added
explicitly covering the encoding of $\mathsf{pk_d}$ in Sapling payment addresses
[#protocol-saplingpaymentaddrencoding]_:

  The restriction on $\mathsf{pk_d}$ reflects its current type
  $\mathsf{KA^{Sapling}.PublicPrimeOrder} = \mathbb{J}^{(r)*}$. In versions of this
  specification prior to 2025.6.0, $\mathsf{pk_d}$ had type
  $\mathsf{KA^{Sapling}.PublicPrimeSubgroup} = \mathbb{J}^{(r)}$, i.e. including
  $\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$. Implementations of consumers for this encoding may need
  to be updated to exclude $\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}$, and should be checked for
  consistency with the current version of [ZIP-216].

Retroactive applicability
-------------------------

As originally specified, this ZIP required that the new validity rules be applied only
after NU5 activation. This was necessary because a transaction containing a non‑canonical
Jubjub point encoding could have been included in any block before NU5 activation.

However, now that NU5 is a settled upgrade on the Zcash Mainnet and Testnet chains
[#protocol-blockchain]_ [#protocol-networks]_, it can be observed that there were no such
non‑canonical encodings in publically visible transaction fields before the Mainnet and
Testnet NU5 activations. Therefore, a full validator MAY enforce the above specification
retroactively.

It remains possible that there could be non‑canonical $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ encodings in
plaintexts obtained by decrypting the $\mathsf{C^{out}}$ field of a Sapling transmitted
note ciphertext. Such encodings MUST be rejected by the decryption procedure in
[#protocol-decryptovk]_ as currently specified. In version 2025.6.0 of the protocol
specification [#protocol-2025.6.0]_ this procedure has been changed to reject them
unconditionally, not only after NU5 activation. (This has no effect on consensus relative
to the previous version, because only small‑order Jubjub curve points have non‑canonical
encodings, and so the check that returns $\bot$ if $\mathsf{pk_d} ∉ \mathbb{J}^{(r)*}$
would catch all such cases.)

Rejecting non‑canonical $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ encodings cannot lead to loss of funds
sent to a Sapling address that has been correctly generated as specified in
[#protocol-saplingkeycomponents]_, because such an address cannot have $\mathsf{ivk} = 0$,
which is the only case in which $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ could be non‑canonical.
They are rejected in wallet rescanning by current `zcashd` and by `librustzcash`-based
light wallets.

Note: There are no such non‑canonical $\mathsf{pk\star_d}$ encodings in the
$\mathsf{C^{out}}$ components of shielded coinbase outputs (which are required by
consensus to be decryptable by an all-zero $\mathsf{ovk}$ [#protocol-txnconsensus]_).


Rationale
=========

Zcash previously had a similar issue with non‑canonical representations of points in
Ed25519 public keys and signatures. In that case, given the prevalence of Ed25519
signatures in the wider ecosystem, the decision was made in ZIP 215 [#zip-0215]_ (which
activated with the Canopy network upgrade [#zip-0251]_) to allow non‑canonical
representations of points.

In Sapling, we are motivated instead to reject these non‑canonical points:

- The chance of the identity occurring anywhere within the Sapling components of
  transactions from implementations following the standard protocol is cryptographically
  negligible.
- This re-enables the aforementioned simpler security analysis of the Sapling protocol.
- The Jubjub curve has a vastly smaller scope of usage in the general cryptographic
  ecosystem than Curve25519 and Ed25519.

The necessary checks are very simple and do not require cryptographic operations,
therefore the performance impact will be negligible.

The public inputs of Jubjub points to the Spend circuit ($\!\mathsf{rk}$ and
$\mathsf{cv^{old}}$) and Output circuit ($\!\mathsf{cv^{new}}$ and
$\mathsf{epk}$) are not affected because they are represented in affine
coordinates as elements of the correct field
($\!\mathbb{F}_{r_\mathbb{S}} = \mathbb{F}_{q_\mathbb{J}}$),
and so no issue of encoding canonicity arises.

Encodings of elliptic curve points on Curve25519, BN‑254 $\mathbb{G}_1$,
BN‑254 $\mathbb{G}_2$, BLS12‑381 $\mathbb{G}_1$, and
BLS12‑381 $\mathbb{G}_2$ are not affected.

Encodings of elliptic curve points on the Pallas and Vesta curves [#protocol-pallasandvesta]_
used by the Orchard shielded protocol are also not affected.


Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This ZIP eliminates a potential source of consensus divergence between differing full node
implementations. From February 2023 onward, no known divergence of this type exists for
any production implementation of Zcash, but an early alpha version of the `zebrad` node
implementation would have been susceptible to this issue.


Deployment
==========

This ZIP activated with Network Upgrade 5. Requirements on points encoded in payment
addresses and full viewing keys MAY be enforced in advance of NU5 activation.

`zcashd` PRs #6000 [#zcashd-pr6000]_, #6399 [#zcashd-pr6399]_, #6459 [#zcashd-pr6459]_,
and #6725 [#zcashd-pr6725]_ retroactively enforce canonical encoding of Jubjub points
for the entire chain history, as described in the `Retroactive applicability`_ section.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1] or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-blockchain] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 3.3: The Block Chain <protocol/protocol.pdf#blockchain>`_
.. [#protocol-networks] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 3.12: Mainnet and Testnet <protocol/protocol.pdf#networks>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 4.2.2: Sapling Key Components <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingkeycomponents>`_
.. [#protocol-spenddesc] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 4.4: Spend Descriptions <protocol/protocol.pdf#spenddesc>`_
.. [#protocol-outputdesc] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 4.5: Output Descriptions <protocol/protocol.pdf#outputdesc>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingandorchardencrypt] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 4.20.1: Encryption (Sapling and Orchard) <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingandorchardencrypt>`_
.. [#protocol-decryptivk] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 4.20.2: Decryption using an Incoming Viewing Key (Sapling and Orchard) <protocol/protocol.pdf#decryptivk>`_
.. [#protocol-decryptovk] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 4.20.3: Decryption using an Outgoing Viewing Key (Sapling and Orchard) <protocol/protocol.pdf#decryptovk>`_
.. [#protocol-jubjub] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 5.4.9.3: Jubjub <protocol/protocol.pdf#jubjub>`_
.. [#protocol-pallasandvesta] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 5.4.9.6: Pallas and Vesta <protocol/protocol.pdf#pallasandvesta>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingpaymentaddrencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 5.6.3.1: Sapling Payment Addresses <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingpaymentaddrencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-saplinginviewingkeyencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 5.6.3.2: Sapling Incoming Viewing Keys <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplinginviewingkeyencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingfullviewingkeyencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 5.6.3.3: Sapling Full Viewing Keys <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingfullviewingkeyencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-txnencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 7.1: Transaction Encoding and Consensus <protocol/protocol.pdf#txnencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-txnconsensus] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 7.1.2: Transaction Consensus Rules <protocol/protocol.pdf#txnconsensus>`_
.. [#protocol-2023.4.0] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 10: Change History — 2023.4.0 <protocol/protocol.pdf#2023.4.0>`_
.. [#protocol-2025.6.0] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.1 [NU6.1]. Section 10: Change History — 2025.6.0 <protocol/protocol.pdf#2025.6.0>`_
.. [#zip-0032-extfvk] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets. Sapling extended full viewing keys <zip-0032.rst#sapling-extended-full-viewing-keys>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0213] `ZIP 213: Shielded Coinbase <zip-0213.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0215] `ZIP 215: Explicitly Defining and Modifying Ed25519 Validation Rules <zip-0215.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0251] `ZIP 251: Deployment of the Canopy Network Upgrade <zip-0251.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0316] `ZIP 316: Unified Addresses and Unified Viewing Keys <zip-0316.rst>`_
.. [#jubjub-crate] `jubjub Rust crate <https://github.com/zkcrypto/jubjub>`_
.. [#zcashd-pr6000] `zcash/zcash PR 6000: Enable ZIP 216 for blocks prior to NU5 activation <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/6000>`_
.. [#zcashd-pr6399] `zcash/zcash PR 6399: Retroactively enable ZIP 216 before NU5 activation <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/6399>`_
.. [#zcashd-pr6459] `zcash/zcash PR 6459: Migrate to zcash_primitives 0.10 <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/6459>`_
.. [#zcashd-pr6725] `zcash/zcash PR 6725: Retroactively use Rust to decrypt shielded coinbase before soft fork <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/6725>`_
.. [#librustzcash-pr109] `zcash/librustzcash PR 109: PaymentAddress encapsulation <https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/pull/109/files#diff-92d6b429f317a74bd65b2ad87d4f841e9fa9e334edab4199cdaba91172cd2d10R147-R151>`_
.. [#zips-issue664] `zcash/zips issue 664: Sapling pk\_d should not allow the zero point <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/664>`_
