::

  ZIP: 1004
  Title: Miner-Directed Dev Fund
  Owners: Andrew Miller (@amiller on zcash forums)
  Status: Obsolete
  Category: Consensus Process
  Created: 2019-06-19
  License: public domain
  Discussions-To: <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/dev-fund-proposal-miner-directed-dev-fund-was-20-to-any-combination-of-ecc-zfnd-parity-or-burn/33864>


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they
appear in all capitals.

For clarity, this ZIP defines these terms:

2nd Halvening Period
   the 4-year period of time, roughly from October 2020 - October 2024,
   during which at most 5,250,000 ZEC will be minted.
DF%
   Dev Fund Percentage, the portion of newly minted ZEC in each block
   reserved for a development fund.
MR%
   Miner Reward Percentage, the portion of newly minted ZEC in each block
   given to miners (so that DF% + MR% = 100%).


Abstract
========

This proposal reserves a portion (20%) of the newly minted coins in each
block for the development fund. A fixed set of developer entities would be
eligible to receive these funds. The fund would be miner-directed in the
sense that the miner of each block can determine how to allocate these funds
to eligible developers.


Out of Scope for this proposal
==============================

* This proposal does not (currently) specify any process for reaching
  agreement on or modifying the fixed set of development entities.
* This proposal does not specify how miners should reach a decision on how
  to direct the development fund, or how developers should appeal to miners
  to do so. Other development fund proposals include specific processes for
  accountability and to support community decision making, such as monthly
  developer calls, lists of planned features and goals, etc. Any of these
  can be compatible with this proposal as well, by providing non-binding
  advice to miners, by reaching agreement on implementation defaults, by
  guiding the choice of the fixed set of developers, etc.
* This proposal only provides a guideline for the 2nd Halvening Period.


Motivation
==========

Like most development fund proposals, this is motivated by the potential
value to the Zcash community of using newly minted coins to hire developers
to continue improving Zcash. [#amiller-notes]_

Unlike most other development fund proposals, this proposal is distinct in
providing a fine-grained “opt-in” [#acityinohio-comment]_ feature, since
miners have the choice to provide a small amount of development funding or
none at all.


Requirements
============

* Simplicity: A design goal of this proposal is to be simple to define and
  implement, without specifying much process for on-chain or off-chain
  governance.
* Opt-in: The proposed development fund is not mandatory, since miners can
  decide not to allocate any funds at all to the developer entities.
* Incentive-compatible: Miners cannot directly pay the development fund to
  themselves.

   
Specification
=============

During the 2nd Halvening Period, a fixed portion (DF% = 20%) of the newly
minted coins in each block are reserved for a Miner-Directed Dev Fund (MDDF).
A hardcoded set of developer entities (e.g., Electric Coin Company, Zcash
Foundation, Parity, or others), represented in the code by their t-address
or z-address public keys, are eligible to receive funding from the MDDF.
The fund is “miner-directed” in the sense that the miner in each block
chooses how to allocate the MDDF coins among the developer entities, simply
by creating outputs in the coinbase transaction. The DF% is a maximum —
miners can also “opt out” by minting a lower number of coins for the MDDF,
or none at all.

This proposal is explicitly limited in scope to the 2nd Halvening Period.
After the end of this period, the entire block reward in each block is
awarded to the miner. The upper bound on the rate of newly minted coins MUST
remain the same as before this proposal (i.e., at most 25 ZEC minted per
10 minutes during the 2nd Halvening Period).

Implementations MAY define a default opt-in allocation (e.g., DF%/2 to the
Electric Coin Company and DF%/2 to the Zcash Foundation).

Implementations SHOULD support changing the allocation (overriding any such
default) through a configuration option.


Examples
--------

The following examples illustrate how miners can build the outputs of the
coinbase transactions to allocate the MDDF to eligible developers. Assume
``Dev1``, ``Dev2`` are the hardcoded addresses of eligible developers, and
``Miner`` is the address of the mining pool mining this block. Assume that
the total newly minted coins are 3.125 ZEC per block during the 2nd Halvening
Period (this takes into account the change to a 75-second block target
spacing after the Blossom Network Upgrade [#zip-0208]_), and that DF% = 20%,
MR% = 80%.

**Example 1: Split equally between two developers**

The transaction outputs of the coinbase transaction are as follows:

* 2.5 ZEC to ``Miner``
* 0.3125 ZEC to ``Dev1``
* 0.3125 ZEC to ``Dev2``.

**Example 2: Opt-out of the development fund**

The transaction outputs of the coinbase transaction are as follows:

* 2.5 ZEC to ``Miner``.


Issues and Further Discussion
=============================

Raised objections and issues so far:

* Miners may have adverse incentives, such as:

  - Stonewalling any development of Proof-of-Work alternatives, such as
    GPU-friendly variants or Proof-of-Stake.
  - Extortion for more funds. To illustrate: "We’ll direct all 20% of the
    development fund to DeveloperX, but only if they promise to keep just
    5% and pass 15% back to the mining pool.”
  - Blocking the development fund out of greed.

* This proposal modifies the terms of what some may consider a social
  contract: given the original code in Zcash implementations, by the end
  of the issuance schedule when all 21 million ZEC have been minted, a
  total of 90% of all minted coins would have originally been awarded to
  miners. Under this proposal, less reward would be available to miners,
  than would be available to them according to the original minting schedule.

* Several others, notably the Blocktown Capital proposal [#blocktown-summary]_,
  have suggested that a 20% development fund would set a precedent for a
  perpetual 20% development fund. This proposal is explicitly limited in
  scope to the 2nd Halvening Period. Thus adopting this proposal on its
  own, if there are no further updates, would result in the the development
  fund ending in 2024.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#amiller-notes] `Notes on reaching agreement about a potential Zcash development fund. Andrew Miller, June 3, 2019. <https://medium.com/@socrates1024/here-are-a-couple-of-points-on-framing-the-discussion-of-a-potential-new-dev-fund-in-zcash-c13bcbf4ed5b>`_
.. [#acityinohio-comment] `Comment on a post “The future of Zcash in the year 2020” in the Zcash Community Forum. Josh Cincinnati, June 3, 2019. <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/the-future-of-zcash-in-the-year-2020/32372/267>`_
.. [#blocktown-summary] `Executive Summary: Blocktown Proposal for Zcash 2020 Network Upgrade. Blocktown Capital, August 15, 2019. <https://medium.com/blocktown/executive-summary-blocktown-proposal-for-zcash-2020-network-upgrade-84ff20997502>`_
.. [#zip-0208] `ZIP 208: Shorter Block Target Spacing <zip-0208.rst>`_

.. raw:: html

  <br>

Change Log
==========

* 2019-06-19 Initial post
* 2019-08-28

  - Update to be more like a ZIP draft
  - Renamed to Miner-Directed Dev Fund
  - Removed references to “Burn”, instead opt-out is in terms of coins never being minted in the first place

* 2019-08-29

  - Address informal pre-ZIP feedback
  - Add example, requirements, fix incomplete sentence about default allocations

* 2019-09-15 Move to GitHub
