::

  ZIP: 214
  Title: Consensus rules for a Zcash Development Fund
  Owners: Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira-emma@electriccoin.co>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@nutty.land>
  Status: [Revision 0] Final, [Revision 1] Implemented (zcashd and zebrad)
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2020-02-28
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/community-sentiment-polling-results-nu4-and-draft-zip-1014/35560>


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHALL", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they appear
in all capitals.

The term "Zcash" in this document is to be interpreted as described in the
Zcash Trademark Donation and License Agreement ([#trademark]_ or successor
agreement) while that agreement is in effect. On termination of that agreement,
the term "Zcash" will refer to the continuations of the same Mainnet and Testnet
block chains as determined by social consensus.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as
described in ZIP 200 [#zip-0200]_ and the Zcash Trademark Donation and License
Agreement ([#trademark]_ or successor agreement).

The term "block subsidy" in this document is to be interpreted as described in
section 3.10 of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-subsidyconcepts]_.

The term "halving" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
sections 7.8 of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-subsidies]_.

The terms "Bootstrap Project" (or "BP"), "Electric Coin Company" (or "ECC"),
"Zcash Foundation" (or "ZF"), "Major Grants", "BP slice", "ZF slice", and
"MG slice" in this document are to be interpreted as described in ZIP 1014
[#zip-1014]_.

The terms "Zcash Community Grants (or "ZCG") and "Financial Privacy Foundation"
(or "FPF") in this document are to be interpreted as described in ZIP 1015
[#zip-1015]_.

The terms "Testnet" and "Mainnet" are to be interpreted as described in
section 3.12 of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-networks]_.

"Canopy" is the code-name for the fifth Zcash network upgrade, also known as
Network Upgrade 4.

"NU6" is the code-name for the seventh Zcash network upgrade, also known as
Network Upgrade 6.


Abstract
========

`Revision 0`_ of this ZIP describes consensus rule changes interpreting the
proposed structure of the Zcash Development Fund, which is to be enacted in
Network Upgrade 4 and last for 4 years.

`Revision 1`_ of this ZIP describes consensus rule changes related to funding
of Zcash development via block subsidies, to be enacted at Network Upgrade 6
and lasting for 1 year.


Applicability
=============

This ZIP concerns the Zcash Mainnet and Testnet, and is not intended to be
applicable to other block chains using Zcash technology.


Motivation
==========

Motivation for the Zcash Development Fund itself is considered in ZIPs 1014
[#zip-1014]_ and 1015 [#zip-1015]_, which give high-level descriptions of the
intended structure of the funds.

An important motivation for describing the consensus rules in a separate ZIP is
to avoid making unintended changes to ZIPs 1014 and 1015, which have already
been agreed between ECC, ZF, and the Zcash community. This facilitates
critically assessing whether the consensus rule changes accurately reflect the
intent of ZIPs 1014 and 1015.


Requirements
============

The primary requirement of this ZIP is to make changes to consensus rules necessary
and sufficient to implement the intent of ZIPs 1014 and 1015.

The Zcash Development Fund distributes funding in ZEC obtained from block subsidies
on Mainnet. This ZIP should also specify corresponding rules, addresses, and
activation height for Testnet, in order to allow testing and auditing of the design
and implementation within sufficient lead time before activation on Mainnet.


Non-requirements
================

This ZIP is not required to enforce provisions of ZIP 1014 or ZIP 1015 that fall
outside what is implementable by Zcash consensus rules.


Specification
=============

Revisions
---------

.. _`Revision 0`:

* Revision 0: The initial version of this specification, as agreed upon
  by the Zcash community in ZIP 1014 [#zip-1014]_.

.. _`Revision 1`:

* Revision 1: Funding streams defined to start at Zcash's second halving,
  and last for one year, as agreed upon in ZIP 1015 [#zip-1015]_.

Activation
----------

The Blossom network upgrade changed the height of the first halving to block height
1046400 [#zip-0208]_, as a consequence of reducing the block target spacing from
150 seconds to 75 seconds.

Since ZIP 1014 specifies that the Zcash Development Fund starts at the first halving,
the activation height of Canopy on Mainnet therefore SHALL be 1046400.

`Revision 0`_ of ZIP 207 [#zip-0207]_ SHALL be activated in Canopy.

Since ZIP 1015 specifies that the specified funding streams start at the second 
halving, the activation height of NU6 on Mainnet therefore SHALL be 2726400.

`Revision 1`_ of ZIP 207 [#zip-0207]_ SHALL be activated in NU6.

As specified in [#zip-0207]_, a funding stream is active for a span of blocks
that includes the block at its start height, but excludes the block at its end
height.

Funding Streams
---------------

As of `Revision 0`_, the following funding streams are defined for Mainnet:

  ================= =========== ============= ============== ============
        Stream       Numerator   Denominator   Start height   End height
  ================= =========== ============= ============== ============
  ``FS_ZIP214_BP``       7           100          1046400       2726400
  ``FS_ZIP214_ZF``       5           100          1046400       2726400
  ``FS_ZIP214_MG``       8           100          1046400       2726400
  ================= =========== ============= ============== ============

As of `Revision 0`_, the following funding streams are defined for Testnet:

  ================= =========== ============= ============== ============
        Stream       Numerator   Denominator   Start height   End height
  ================= =========== ============= ============== ============
  ``FS_ZIP214_BP``       7           100          1028500       2796000
  ``FS_ZIP214_ZF``       5           100          1028500       2796000
  ``FS_ZIP214_MG``       8           100          1028500       2796000
  ================= =========== ============= ============== ============

As of `Revision 1`_, the following additional streams are defined for Mainnet:

================= =========== ============= ============== ============
      Stream       Numerator   Denominator   Start height   End height
================= =========== ============= ============== ============
``FS_FPF_ZCG``         8           100          2726400      3146400
``FS_DEFERRED``       12           100          2726400      3146400
================= =========== ============= ============== ============

As of `Revision 1`_, the following additional streams are defined for Testnet:

================= =========== ============= ============== ============
      Stream       Numerator   Denominator   Start height   End height
================= =========== ============= ============== ============
``FS_FPF_ZCG``         8           100          2976000      3396000
``FS_DEFERRED``       12           100          2976000      3396000
================= =========== ============= ============== ============

Notes for `Revision 0`_:

* The block heights of halvings are different between Testnet and Mainnet, as a
  result of different activation heights for the Blossom network upgrade (which
  changed the block target spacing). The end height of these funding streams
  corresponds to the second halving on each network.
* On Testnet, the activation height of Canopy will be before the first halving.
  Therefore, the consequence of the above rules for Testnet is that the amount sent
  to each Zcash Development Fund recipient address will initially (before Testnet
  block height 1116000) be double the number of currency units as the corresponding
  initial amount on Mainnet. This reduces to the same number of currency units as on
  Mainnet, from Testnet block heights 1116000 (inclusive) to 2796000 (exclusive).

Notes for `Revision 1`_:

* The new funding streams begin at the second halving for Mainnet, but the second 
  halving on Testnet occurred prior to the introduction of the new funding streams.
  For both new funding streams on each network, the associated duration
  corresponds to approximately one year's worth of blocks.

Dev Fund Recipient Addresses for `Revision 0`_
----------------------------------------------

For each of Testnet and Mainnet, before deploying this ZIP in a node implementation
with the activation height set for that network, each of the parties (ECC on behalf
of BP; and ZF) SHALL generate sequences of recipient addresses to be used for each
stream in each funding period:

* ECC SHALL generate the addresses for the ``FS_ZIP214_BP`` funding stream, which on
  Mainnet corresponds to the **BP slice**;
* ZF SHALL generate the addresses for the ``FS_ZIP214_ZF`` and ``FS_ZIP214_MG``
  funding streams, which on Mainnet correspond to the **ZF slice** and **MG slice**
  respectively.

Within each stream, the addresses MAY be independent, or MAY be repeated between
funding periods. Each party SHOULD take account of operational security issues
associated with potential compromise of the associated spending keys.

Funds sent to each Mainnet funding stream SHALL be governed by all requirements on
the corresponding slice specified in ZIP 1014 [#zip-1014]_.

No requirements are imposed on the use of funds sent to Testnet funding streams.

Direct-grant option
'''''''''''''''''''

ZIP 1014 specified a "direct-grant option" by which, if agreed upon by both ECC
and ZF before Canopy activation, some portion of the **MG slice** may be directly
assigned to the grantee(s), rather than accepted and disbursed by ZF. [#zip-1014]_
However, this option was never taken up.

Mainnet Recipient Addresses for `Revision 0`_
---------------------------------------------

::

  FS_ZIP214_BP.AddressList[0..47] = [
    "t3LmX1cxWPPPqL4TZHx42HU3U5ghbFjRiif",
    "t3Toxk1vJQ6UjWQ42tUJz2rV2feUWkpbTDs",
    "t3ZBdBe4iokmsjdhMuwkxEdqMCFN16YxKe6",
    "t3ZuaJziLM8xZ32rjDUzVjVtyYdDSz8GLWB",
    "t3bAtYWa4bi8VrtvqySxnbr5uqcG9czQGTZ",
    "t3dktADfb5Rmxncpe1HS5BRS5Gcj7MZWYBi",
    "t3hgskquvKKoCtvxw86yN7q8bzwRxNgUZmc",
    "t3R1VrLzwcxAZzkX4mX3KGbWpNsgtYtMntj",
    "t3ff6fhemqPMVujD3AQurxRxTdvS1pPSaa2",
    "t3cEUQFG3KYnFG6qYhPxSNgGi3HDjUPwC3J",
    "t3WR9F5U4QvUFqqx9zFmwT6xFqduqRRXnaa",
    "t3PYc1LWngrdUrJJbHkYPCKvJuvJjcm85Ch",
    "t3bgkjiUeatWNkhxY3cWyLbTxKksAfk561R",
    "t3Z5rrR8zahxUpZ8itmCKhMSfxiKjUp5Dk5",
    "t3PU1j7YW3fJ67jUbkGhSRto8qK2qXCUiW3",
    "t3S3yaT7EwNLaFZCamfsxxKwamQW2aRGEkh",
    "t3eutXKJ9tEaPSxZpmowhzKhPfJvmtwTEZK",
    "t3gbTb7brxLdVVghSPSd3ycGxzHbUpukeDm",
    "t3UCKW2LrHFqPMQFEbZn6FpjqnhAAbfpMYR",
    "t3NyHsrnYbqaySoQqEQRyTWkjvM2PLkU7Uu",
    "t3QEFL6acxuZwiXtW3YvV6njDVGjJ1qeaRo",
    "t3PdBRr2S1XTDzrV8bnZkXF3SJcrzHWe1wj",
    "t3ZWyRPpWRo23pKxTLtWsnfEKeq9T4XPxKM",
    "t3he6QytKCTydhpztykFsSsb9PmBT5JBZLi",
    "t3VWxWDsLb2TURNEP6tA1ZSeQzUmPKFNxRY",
    "t3NmWLvZkbciNAipauzsFRMxoZGqmtJksbz",
    "t3cKr4YxVPvPBG1mCvzaoTTdBNokohsRJ8n",
    "t3T3smGZn6BoSFXWWXa1RaoQdcyaFjMfuYK",
    "t3gkDUe9Gm4GGpjMk86TiJZqhztBVMiUSSA",
    "t3eretuBeBXFHe5jAqeSpUS1cpxVh51fAeb",
    "t3dN8g9zi2UGJdixGe9txeSxeofLS9t3yFQ",
    "t3S799pq9sYBFwccRecoTJ3SvQXRHPrHqvx",
    "t3fhYnv1S5dXwau7GED3c1XErzt4n4vDxmf",
    "t3cmE3vsBc5xfDJKXXZdpydCPSdZqt6AcNi",
    "t3h5fPdjJVHaH4HwynYDM5BB3J7uQaoUwKi",
    "t3Ma35c68BgRX8sdLDJ6WR1PCrKiWHG4Da9",
    "t3LokMKPL1J8rkJZvVpfuH7dLu6oUWqZKQK",
    "t3WFFGbEbhJWnASZxVLw2iTJBZfJGGX73mM",
    "t3L8GLEsUn4QHNaRYcX3EGyXmQ8kjpT1zTa",
    "t3PgfByBhaBSkH8uq4nYJ9ZBX4NhGCJBVYm",
    "t3WecsqKDhWXD4JAgBVcnaCC2itzyNZhJrv",
    "t3ZG9cSfopnsMQupKW5v9sTotjcP5P6RTbn",
    "t3hC1Ywb5zDwUYYV8LwhvF5rZ6m49jxXSG5",
    "t3VgMqDL15ZcyQDeqBsBW3W6rzfftrWP2yB",
    "t3LC94Y6BwLoDtBoK2NuewaEbnko1zvR9rm",
    "t3cWCUZJR3GtALaTcatrrpNJ3MGbMFVLRwQ",
    "t3YYF4rPLVxDcF9hHFsXyc5Yq1TFfbojCY6",
    "t3XHAGxRP2FNfhAjxGjxbrQPYtQQjc3RCQD"
  ]

  FS_ZIP214_ZF.AddressList[0..47] = ["t3dvVE3SQEi7kqNzwrfNePxZ1d4hUyztBA1"] * 48

  FS_ZIP214_MG.AddressList[0..47] = ["t3XyYW8yBFRuMnfvm5KLGFbEVz25kckZXym"] * 48

(i.e. ``FS_ZIP214_ZF.AddressList`` and ``FS_ZIP214_MG.AddressList`` for Mainnet each
consist of 48 repetitions of the same address).

Mainnet Recipient Addresses for `Revision 1`_
---------------------------------------------

  FS_FPF_ZCG.AddressList[0..11] = ["t3cFfPt1Bcvgez9ZbMBFWeZsskxTkPzGCow"] * 12

Testnet Recipient Addresses for `Revision 0`_
---------------------------------------------

::

  FS_ZIP214_BP.AddressList[0..50] = [
    "t26ovBdKAJLtrvBsE2QGF4nqBkEuptuPFZz",
    "t26ovBdKAJLtrvBsE2QGF4nqBkEuptuPFZz",
    "t26ovBdKAJLtrvBsE2QGF4nqBkEuptuPFZz",
    "t26ovBdKAJLtrvBsE2QGF4nqBkEuptuPFZz",
    "t2NNHrgPpE388atmWSF4DxAb3xAoW5Yp45M",
    "t2VMN28itPyMeMHBEd9Z1hm6YLkQcGA1Wwe",
    "t2CHa1TtdfUV8UYhNm7oxbzRyfr8616BYh2",
    "t2F77xtr28U96Z2bC53ZEdTnQSUAyDuoa67",
    "t2ARrzhbgcpoVBDPivUuj6PzXzDkTBPqfcT",
    "t278aQ8XbvFR15mecRguiJDQQVRNnkU8kJw",
    "t2Dp1BGnZsrTXZoEWLyjHmg3EPvmwBnPDGB",
    "t2KzeqXgf4ju33hiSqCuKDb8iHjPCjMq9iL",
    "t2Nyxqv1BiWY1eUSiuxVw36oveawYuo18tr",
    "t2DKFk5JRsVoiuinK8Ti6eM4Yp7v8BbfTyH",
    "t2CUaBca4k1x36SC4q8Nc8eBoqkMpF3CaLg",
    "t296SiKL7L5wvFmEdMxVLz1oYgd6fTfcbZj",
    "t29fBCFbhgsjL3XYEZ1yk1TUh7eTusB6dPg",
    "t2FGofLJXa419A76Gpf5ncxQB4gQXiQMXjK",
    "t2ExfrnRVnRiXDvxerQ8nZbcUQvNvAJA6Qu",
    "t28JUffLp47eKPRHKvwSPzX27i9ow8LSXHx",
    "t2JXWPtrtyL861rFWMZVtm3yfgxAf4H7uPA",
    "t2QdgbJoWfYHgyvEDEZBjHmgkr9yNJff3Hi",
    "t2QW43nkco8r32ZGRN6iw6eSzyDjkMwCV3n",
    "t2DgYDXMJTYLwNcxighQ9RCgPxMVATRcUdC",
    "t2Bop7dg33HGZx3wunnQzi2R2ntfpjuti3M",
    "t2HVeEwovcLq9RstAbYkqngXNEsCe2vjJh9",
    "t2HxbP5keQSx7p592zWQ5bJ5GrMmGDsV2Xa",
    "t2TJzUg2matao3mztBRJoWnJY6ekUau6tPD",
    "t29pMzxmo6wod25YhswcjKv3AFRNiBZHuhj",
    "t2QBQMRiJKYjshJpE6RhbF7GLo51yE6d4wZ",
    "t2F5RqnqguzZeiLtYHFx4yYfy6pDnut7tw5",
    "t2CHvyZANE7XCtg8AhZnrcHCC7Ys1jJhK13",
    "t2BRzpMdrGWZJ2upsaNQv6fSbkbTy7EitLo",
    "t2BFixHGQMAWDY67LyTN514xRAB94iEjXp3",
    "t2Uvz1iVPzBEWfQBH1p7NZJsFhD74tKaG8V",
    "t2CmFDj5q6rJSRZeHf1SdrowinyMNcj438n",
    "t2ErNvWEReTfPDBaNizjMPVssz66aVZh1hZ",
    "t2GeJQ8wBUiHKDVzVM5ZtKfY5reCg7CnASs",
    "t2L2eFtkKv1G6j55kLytKXTGuir4raAy3yr",
    "t2EK2b87dpPazb7VvmEGc8iR6SJ289RywGL",
    "t2DJ7RKeZJxdA4nZn8hRGXE8NUyTzjujph9",
    "t2K1pXo4eByuWpKLkssyMLe8QKUbxnfFC3H",
    "t2TB4mbSpuAcCWkH94Leb27FnRxo16AEHDg",
    "t2Phx4gVL4YRnNsH3jM1M7jE4Fo329E66Na",
    "t2VQZGmeNomN8c3USefeLL9nmU6M8x8CVzC",
    "t2RicCvTVTY5y9JkreSRv3Xs8q2K67YxHLi",
    "t2JrSLxTGc8wtPDe9hwbaeUjCrCfc4iZnDD",
    "t2Uh9Au1PDDSw117sAbGivKREkmMxVC5tZo",
    "t2FDwoJKLeEBMTy3oP7RLQ1Fihhvz49a3Bv",
    "t2FY18mrgtb7QLeHA8ShnxLXuW8cNQ2n1v8",
    "t2L15TkDYum7dnQRBqfvWdRe8Yw3jVy9z7g"
  ]

  FS_ZIP214_ZF.AddressList[0..50] = ["t27eWDgjFYJGVXmzrXeVjnb5J3uXDM9xH9v"] * 51

  FS_ZIP214_MG.AddressList[0..50] = ["t2Gvxv2uNM7hbbACjNox4H6DjByoKZ2Fa3P"] * 51

(i.e. ``FS_ZIP214_ZF.AddressList`` and ``FS_ZIP214_MG.AddressList`` for Testnet each
consist of 51 repetitions of the same address).

Testnet Recipient Addresses for `Revision 1`_
---------------------------------------------

  FS_FPF_ZCG.AddressList[0..12] = ["t2HifwjUj9uyxr9bknR8LFuQbc98c3vkXtu"] * 13


Rationale for `Revision 0`_
===========================

The rationale for ZF generating the addresses for the ``FS_ZIP214_MG`` funding
stream is that ZF is the financial recipient of the **MG slice** as specified
in ZIP 1014. [#zip-1014]_

Generation of recipient addresses for Testnet is specified to be done by the
same parties as on Mainnet, in order to allow practicing each party's security
procedures.

It was judged to be unnecessary to have a mechanism to update funding stream
definitions (in case of security breach or changes to direct grant recipients)
other than at network upgrades.


Deployment
==========

`Revision 0`_ of this proposal was deployed with Canopy. [#zip-0251]_
`Revision 1`_ of this proposal is intended to be deployed with NU6. [#zip-0253]_


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2024.5.1 or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-subsidyconcepts] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2024.5.1 [NU6]. Section 3.10: Block Subsidy, Funding Streams, and Founders' Reward <protocol/protocol.pdf#subsidyconcepts>`_
.. [#protocol-networks] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2024.5.1 [NU6]. Section 3.12: Mainnet and Testnet <protocol/protocol.pdf#networks>`_
.. [#protocol-subsidies] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2024.5.1 [NU6]. Section 7.8: Calculation of Block Subsidy, Funding Streams, and Founders' Reward <protocol/protocol.pdf#subsidies>`_
.. [#trademark] `Zcash Trademark Donation and License Agreement <https://electriccoin.co/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Final-Consolidated-Version-ECC-Zcash-Trademark-Transfer-Documents-1.pdf>`_
.. [#osd] `The Open Source Definition <https://opensource.org/osd>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0207] `ZIP 207: Funding Streams <zip-0207.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0208] `ZIP 208: Shorter Block Target Spacing <zip-0208.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0251] `ZIP 251: Deployment of the Canopy Network Upgrade <zip-0251.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0253] `ZIP 253: Deployment of the NU6 Network Upgrade <zip-0253.rst>`_
.. [#zip-1014] `ZIP 1014: Establishing a Dev Fund for ECC, ZF, and Major Grants <zip-1014.rst>`_
.. [#zip-1015] `ZIP 1015: Block Subsidy Allocation for Non-Direct Development Funding <zip-1015.rst>`_
