::

  ZIP: 315
  Title: Best Practices for Wallet Implementations
  Owners: Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira@jacaranda.org>
          Jack Grigg <thestr4d@gmail.com>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@nutty.land>
  Credits: Francisco Gindre
  Status: Draft
  Category: Wallet
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/447>
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/607>


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals.

The terms below are to be interpreted as follows:

Auto-shielding
    The process of automatically transferring transparent funds to the most recent
    shielded pool on receipt.

Auto-migration
    The process of automatically transferring shielded funds from older pools to the
    most preferred (usually the most recent) pool on receipt.

Opportunistic migration
    The process of transferring previously received shielded funds from older pools
    to the most preferred (usually the most recent) pool as part of a user-initiated
    transaction.

Transaction output (TXO)
    An output (transparent coin or shielded note) of a transaction on the consensus
    block chain or in the mempool visible to a wallet.

TODO: Add informal definitions of:
* known-spendable and confirmed-spendable TXOs;
* trusted and untrusted TXOs.

These should forward-reference the specification section with the formal definitions.


Motivation
==========

Zcash wallets have to serve two purposes as a user agent:

* to manage the economic actions dictated by the user;
* to manage the privacy implications of these actions.

The goal of this ZIP is to document security and privacy best practices when handling
funds and transactions as the user's agent. These best practices are intended to
provide as much privacy as is feasible by default, while still enabling the user's
desired transactions to occur, and exposing any privacy implications to the user so
that they have enough information to assess the consequences of their economic actions.

This ZIP covers best practices for:

* what information to display to the user about transactions and balances;
* how to handle interactions between the ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_ key tree and
  Unified Addresses [#zip-0316]_;
* when to use external or internal keys/addresses;
* sharing addresses and viewing keys;
* sending and receiving funds (including fee selection);
* migrating funds between pools.

Note: The policies implemented by the legacy `zcashd` internal wallet are known
to be in violation of this ZIP.


Requirements
============

User consent
------------

A wallet typically reveals some information in the process of creating a transaction.
Which information is revealed depends on the configured wallet privacy policy.
The guiding principle of these requirements is that users must explicitly consent
to each instance of information being revealed by the wallet in a transaction.

A user may give blanket consent to reveal a particular kind of information, and
must also be able to change the configured wallet privacy policy to avoid the
wallet creating new information leaks of a given type.

The specifications below describe some situations in which blanket consent may be
inappropriate.

Some varieties of consent may not be revocable, for example if a user chooses to
share some of their keys.


Prompt accessibility of funds
-----------------------------

Wallets need to take account of two main concerns with respect to
accessibility of funds:

* enabling funds to be spent as quickly as possible to reduce latency;
* ensuring that the confirmed-spendable balance is not overestimated,
  and so can be trusted by the user.

These concerns affect the way that balances should be computed, which
notes are selected for spending, and how the wallet should ensure that
sufficient notes are available to cover multiple spends within a short
period.

To support this we define two kinds of TXOs:

* A trusted TXO is a TXO received from a party where the wallet trusts that
  it will remain mined in its original transaction, such as TXOs created by
  the wallet's internal TXO handling.
* An untrusted TXO is a TXO received by the wallet that is not trusted.

Wallets can then require that untrusted TXOs need more confirmations before
they become confirmed-spendable than trusted TXOs. This provides an improved
trade-off between latency on the one hand, and reliability and safety on the
other.


Specification
=============

Long-term storage of funds
--------------------------

It is RECOMMENDED that wallets only hold funds as shielded in the long term;
that is, if a wallet supports receiving transparent funds (or supports
importing a seed from another wallet that might have done so), then it SHOULD
auto-shield such funds by default.

A shielding transaction is always linked to the transparent addresses it
spends from. This can cause undesirable information leaks:

a) if the inputs to the transaction are associated with multiple transparent
   addresses, those addresses will be linked to each other;
b) a link between the input transparent address(es) and the payment will be
   visible to the recipient(s), or to any other holder of an Incoming Viewing
   Key for the destination address(es).

Despite the fact that it is not possible to achieve strong privacy guarantees
from *any* use of transparent addresses, it is undesirable to reveal this
additional information. In particular, issue b) motivates ruling out the use
of "opportunistic shielding", i.e. shielding previously received transparent
funds as part of a user-initiated transaction.

Wallets SHOULD NOT auto-shield from multiple transparent addresses in the
same transaction, and SHOULD NOT use opportunistic shielding.

Following all of the recommendations in this section improves both collective
privacy and the user's individual privacy, by maximizing the size of the note
anonymity set over time and minimizing the potential linkage of shielding
transactions to other transactions.

The remainder of this specification assumes a wallet that follows all of these
recommendations, except where explicitly noted.

Address management
------------------

Zcash wallets SHOULD only use addresses generated deterministically from a
seed as specified in ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_. The discussion of address management
below assumes this is the case.

The general framework specified in ZIP 32 is that addresses are derived in
a hierarchy [#zip-0032-wallet-usage]_, following a similar structure to that
defined by BIP 44. Each `account` in the derivation path represents a distinct
spending authority. Funds within an account are differentiated according to the
protocol under which the TXOs that contributed to the account balance were
created, but TXOs are not managed individually except when it is required
to select funds from a specific shielded pool in order to reduce information
leakage.

ZIP 316 specifies that when generating a Unified Address, the same diversifier
index MUST be used for each Receiver. [#zip-0316-deriving-a-unified-address]_
This has the consequence that, for wallets that implement address rotation,
care must be taken to avoid accidentally leaking information that allows an
observer to link the ownership of addresses that are intended by the wallet
user to be unrelated to one another.


Allowed transfers
-----------------

Wallets SHOULD NOT spend funds from a transparent address in a transaction with
an external recipient, unless the user gives explicit consent for this on a
per-transaction basis. Wallets MAY further restrict the set of transfers they
perform.


Auto-shielding
--------------

Auto-shielding requires that the wallet have ambient access to the spending
authority, and that this authority may be exercised without user intervention.
This is not the case for e.g. wallets where key material is stored in a secure
enclave with access that is mediated by direct user interaction, or wallets
used in conjunction with hardware devices.

For wallets that have the required ambient spending authority, auto-shielding
is the process by which transparent UTXOs detected as belonging to the wallet
are shielded by the wallet without user intervention.

Wallet users MUST be able to disable auto-shielding functionality offered by a
wallet.

Automatic shielding and automatic/opportunistic migration SHOULD NOT be
applied to inputs where the cost of shielding or migrating them will
exceed their economic value. If these transactions are paying the
ZIP 317 conventional fee [#zip-0317]_, that will be the case if the
amount of the UTXO to be shielded/migrated exceeds the marginal
fee, and cannot be accommodated by an input that would be present
in any case due to padding of the number of inputs from a given
shielded pool.


Trusted and untrusted TXOs
--------------------------

A wallet SHOULD treat received TXOs that are outputs of transactions created
by the same wallet, as trusted TXOs. Wallets MAY enable users to mark specific
external transactions as trusted, allowing their received TXOs also to be
classified as trusted TXOs. Wallets MAY also permit users to define alternate
policies for the number of confirmations required before untrusted TXOs may be
spent based on a user-configured value threshold.

A wallet SHOULD have a policy that is clearly communicated to the user for
the number of confirmations needed to spend untrusted and trusted TXOs
respectively. The following confirmation policy is RECOMMENDED:

* 10 confirmations, for untrusted TXOs;
* 3 confirmations, for trusted TXOs.

Wallets SHOULD NOT permit the spending of TXOs with fewer than 3 confirmations,
with the exception of:

* transparent UTXOs that are spent in shielding transactions
* ephemeral transparent UTXOs created in the process of sending funds from
  the shielded pools to a TEX recipient address [#zip-0320]_.

Rationale for the given numbers of confirmations
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The rationale for choosing three confirmations for trusted TXOs is that
anecdotally, reorgs are usually less than three blocks.

The consequences of attempting to spend a trusted TXO may be less severe in the
case of a rollback than the consequences of attempting to spend an untrusted TXO.
The value received from a trusted TXO should always be recoverable, whereas
recovering value received from an untrusted TXO may require the user to request
that funds are re-sent.


Categories of TXOs according to spendability
--------------------------------------------

A TXO is *known-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and wallet
state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is unspent at the wallet's view of the chain tip, and that view is
  reasonably up-to-date;

  TODO: consider undoing the up-to-date part, as when combined with the
  definition of balance below, it causes wallet balance to drop to zero in
  the short window between opening and updating the wallet's chain tip view.
* the TXO is not committed to be spent in another unexpired transaction created
  by this wallet; and
* the wallet can effect the spend, either by having access to the TXO's
  spending key (for whatever protocol the TXO uses) or by mediating interaction
  with a hardware device or other offline signing protocol.

Shielded TXOs
'''''''''''''

A shielded TXO is *confirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is known-spendable; and
* the wallet has sufficient contextual information to be able to effect the
  spend (i.e. it is able to construct required witnesses, etc.); and
* one of the following is true:

  * the TXO is not an output of a wallet-internal shielding transaction, and either:

    * it is trusted and has at least the required confirmations for trusted TXOs
    * it is untrusted and has at least the required confirmations for untrusted TXOs.

  * the TXO is the output of a wallet-internal shielding transaction, and both:
  
    * the transparent UTXOs spent in the shielding transaction have at least
      `(untrusted_confirmations - trusted_confirmations)` confirmations
    * the wallet-internal shielding transaction has at least `trusted_confirmations`
      confirmations

A TXO is *unconfirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if the TXO is known-spendable but is not
confirmed-spendable in that state.

A TXO is *watch-only* if and only if the wallet has its full viewing key
(or address in the case of a transparent TXO) but not its spending key.

A wallet MUST NOT attempt to spend a TXO in a user-initiated transaction
that is not confirmed-spendable.

Transparent UTXOs
'''''''''''''''''

A transparent UTXO is *confirmed-shieldable* relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is known-spendable; and
* the wallet has sufficient contextual information to be able to effect the
  spend (i.e. it is able to construct a correct redeem script, etc.)

Wallets MAY attempt to spend received transparent UTXOs in wallet-internal
shielding transactions with zero confirmations. In this case, the resulting
shielded funds will not be made available for spending until the transaction
that produced the original transparent UTXOs has at least
`untrusted_confirmations`, and the shielding transaction has at least
`trusted_confirmations`. Wallet implementers should take care not to mistake
the TXOs resulting from shielding transactions as trusted outputs just because
they are sent to a wallet-internal address.

Reporting of balances
---------------------

Wallets SHOULD report:

* Confirmed-spendable balance.
* Pending balance, *or* total balance.

Wallets MAY report:

* Un-economic balance.

These are calculated as follows:

* The confirmed-spendable balance is the sum of values of confirmed-spendable
  TXOs. This balance MAY ignore notes with value less than the ZIP 317
  marginal fee [#zip-0317]_.
* The pending balance is the sum of values of unconfirmed-spendable TXOs. This
  balance MAY ignore notes with value less than the ZIP 317 marginal fee
  [#zip-0317]_, and MUST exercise this option in a way that is consistent
  with how the confirmed-spendable balance is computed.
* The total balance is the confirmed-spendable balance plus the pending
  balance.
* The un-economic balance is the total of TXOs that individually have value
  less than the ZIP 317 marginal fee [#zip-0317]_. Such TXOs can only be spent
  as "grace inputs" as they do not provide sufficient value to pay the fees
  required to spend them; wallets MAY ignore the presence of such notes in note
  selection and balance calculation. If wallets ignore the presence of such
  notes, they MUST do so consistently; i.e. wallets MUST NOT report them as
  part of balance that is exposed to the user as spendable or pending if the
  wallet does not provide any mechanism to spend them.

Note: the definition of "confirmed-spendable" above ensures that:

* if auto-shielding is enabled, transparent funds will be reported in
  the pending or total balance, but not in the confirmed-spendable
  balance;
* if the wallet has not synchronized at least the nullifier set to the
  chain tip, the confirmed-spendable balance will be zero.

If auto-shielding is disabled, the wallet MAY report shielded and
transparent balances separately. If it does so, it MUST make clear
whether each reported balance corresponds to a confirmed-spendable,
pending, or total subset of funds.

Rationale for reporting of balances
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If auto-shielding is disabled, then separate shielded and transparent
balances can constitute useful information. If auto-shielding is enabled
then the wallet can and will automatically spend transparent TXOs in
order to shield them, and so transparent TXOs need to be presented as
pending, not as part of the balance spendable by the user.

Potentially, for expert users, separate shielded balances per pool
could also be useful.

Open question: Does the specification of balance reporting give the user
sufficient visibility into the operation of auto-shielding and pool
migration/usage?

Reporting of transactions
-------------------------

If a transaction includes watch-only received TXOs, its watch-only incoming
balance MUST be reported separately to any potentially known-spendable balance.

Incoming transactions
'''''''''''''''''''''

A transaction is incoming if it contains unconfirmed-spendable TXOs.
Incoming transactions SHOULD be reported with their number of confirmations
and their balances as described in `Reporting of balances`_.

Sent transactions
'''''''''''''''''

A transaction is sent if it was either:

* created by the wallet, or
* detected by using the wallet's outgoing viewing keys to decrypt
  Sapling or Orchard outputs, or
* detected as spending a note that was at some time held by the
  wallet by recognizing that note's nullifier, or
* detected as spending a transparent TXO associated with one of
  the wallet's addresses (including watch-only addresses).

Sent transactions SHOULD be reported with their number of confirmations,
an estimate of how long until they expire (if they are unmined and
have an expiry height), and their balances as described in
`Reporting of balances`_.


Transaction creation
--------------------

Obtaining user consent for information leakage
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Information leakage analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The privacy provided by a Zcash transaction depends on the information leaked
in the creation of that transaction and the process of it being broadcast for
inclusion in the block chain.

The requirements in this section are intended to minimize the leakage of such
information where possible, and to ensure that the user is informed of any
remaining information that would be leaked, and consents to such leakage.

The list below describes the kinds of information that might be leaked. After
a candidate transaction has been created and prior to it being revealed
outside a trusted path to the user, the wallet user interface SHOULD obtain
the user's consent for all of the leaked information.

Assumption: There is always a transaction confirmation step for transactions
that send funds out of the wallet.


Kinds of information leakage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Transaction version (v4 or v5, as of NU5)

It is RECOMMENDED to use v5 transactions unless Sprout funds are being spent.

* Lock time (rarely used; may be a distinguisher if it is)

SHOULD be zero.

* Expiry height and anchor position

See `Anchor selection`_ below.

These give information about what block height the creator was synced to, and
some policy information.

* Transparent inputs and outputs

See `Linkability of transactions or addresses`_.

* Public value balances

  * Together with the transparent inputs and outputs, these determine the fee
    and the amount being transferred between pools.
  * The fee is dependent on policy, but for a given policy we attempt to make
    it only depend on other already-leaked metadata.

TODO: we SHOULD try to create fully shielded transactions where possible.

* Numbers of JoinSplits, Spends, Outputs, and Actions

  * This could correlate with other information under certain circumstances.
    For example in a “dusting attack”, the adversary sends a victim lots of
    small-valued notes (or notes with strategically chosen values),
    increasing the probability that the victim’s transactions will have a
    larger number of spends than other transactions (or an identifiable
    number of spends). There are note management strategies that can mitigate
    this, but they have not been implemented yet.

* Which spends of given TXOs are repeated across transactions

  * This may happen because a previous transaction expired and the user is
    trying to spend some of the same TXOs.

* Whether the transaction is coinbase

* For coinbase transactions, the amounts / destination addresses / memos of
  shielded outputs

* Orchard flags (enableSpends/enableOutputs)

  * Under normal circumstances these only depend on whether the transaction
    is coinbase.


Linkability of transactions or addresses
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Motivation for choices reducing linkability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We want to support creating unlinkable addresses, in order that a user can
give different addresses to different counterparties, in such a way that the
counterparties (even if they collude) cannot tell that the addresses were
provided by the same or distinct users.

If multiple UTXOs are received at the same transparent address, it is safe
to shield them all in the same transaction, because that is not leaking
additional information.

UTXOs received on different transparent receivers SHOULD NOT be shielded
in the same transaction. Ideally, when they are shielded in separate
transactions, this should be done in such a way that the timing of those
transactions is not linkable.

TODO: move this. Daira-Emma thinks that if we only document leakage rather
than explicitly say in the specification of how to construct transactions
how to mitigate it, then implementors will ignore it.

When spending transparent UTXOs, they SHOULD only be sent to an internal
shielded receiver belonging to the wallet, except when they are generated
and spent ephemerally as part of a ZIP 320 transfer [#zip-0320]_.

A wallet MUST NOT send funds to a transparent address unless all of the
source funds come from shielded pools, and this SHOULD be a single shielded
pool.

We want to minimize pool crossing.

Anchor selection
''''''''''''''''

A wallet SHOULD choose an anchor a number of blocks back from the head of the
chain equal to the trusted confirmation depth. That is, if the current block
is at height H, the anchor SHOULD reflect the final treestate of the block at
height H-3.

TODO: Define a parameter for this depth, and then RECOMMEND a value of 3.


Rationale for anchor selection
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

* If the chain rolls back past the block at which the anchor is chosen, then
  the anchor and the transaction will be invalidated. This is undesirable
  both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent shielded notes
  will have been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions
  that spend those notes.

  TODO: Reword this given the proposed note management mitigation below.
* On the other hand, it is undesirable to choose an anchor too many blocks
  back, because that prevents more recently received shielded notes from
  being spent.
* Using a fixed anchor depth (as opposed to a different depth depending on
  whether or not we are spending trusted shielded notes) avoids leaking
  information about whether or not the shielded notes we spent were
  trusted.


Note selection
''''''''''''''

TODO: recommend that when nullifiers are revealed in a transaction that is then
invalidated (or revealed in some other detectable way), they SHOULD be used in
a note management tx to avoid linking the invalidated tx with some arbitrary
future tx. Provided that there are no transparent outputs leaving this wallet's
control, the same arities and transparent outputs SHOULD be preserved, which
also avoids revealing whether the user changed their mind about whether to send
the original semantic transaction.


Expiration height
'''''''''''''''''

A wallet SHOULD create transactions using the default expiration height of
40 blocks from the current height, as specified in [#zip-0203]_.


Open question
'''''''''''''

How should wallet developers time transactions to avoid linkability?

* when we roll addresses with transparent components, we have to consider
  how that could allow linking of shielded components


TODO: dusting attack mitigation


Network-layer privacy
---------------------


Viewing keys
------------

What they are supposed to reveal; see ZIP 310 for Sapling (needs updating for
Orchard). https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/606


Auto-migration
--------------


Information leakage for transfers between pools
-----------------------------------------------


If no auto-migration, if you can satisfy a transfer request to Sapling from your
Sapling funds, do so.

The user's consent is needed to reveal amounts publically (as opposed
to revealing them to the holder of a viewing key authorized to see that
amount). Therefore, there should be per-transaction opt-in for any
transfer that publically reveals amounts on chain.

* there may be a compatibility issue for amount-revealing cross-pool txns that were
  previously allowed without opt-in

Wallets MUST NOT automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer
(since that could reveal the total funds the user holds in some pool).

In order to maintain the integrity of IVK guarantees, wallets should not generate
unified addresses that contain internal receivers, nor expose internal receivers
(such as those used for auto-shielding and change outputs) in any way.

Open questions:

* should there be an auto-migration option from Sapling to Orchard?

str4d notes
'''''''''''

If we want to have both automatic and opportunistic shielding, and keep the two
indistinguishable, then we can't auto-shield when the transparent balance reaches
some threshold (otherwise opportunistic would either never be used, or would be
identifiable when it uses the balance below the threshold).

Instead, a proposition: we define a distribution of "time since last payment to the
address" from which we sample the time at which the auto-shielding transaction will
be created. This distribution is weighted by the balance in the address, so as more
funds accrue, the auto-shielding transaction is more likely to be created.

- It ensures that all funds will eventually be auto-shielded, while preventing
  fee-dusting attacks (where dust is sent in order to repeatedly consume fees from
  the wallet), as the auto-shielding transaction is not directly triggered by payment
  receipt.

- If the user makes a shielding transaction in the meantime, we opportunistically
  shield, without it being clearly not an auto-shielding transaction.

- If a wallet is offline for a long time, then it would likely auto-shield as soon as
  it finishes syncing. This maybe isn't enough to reveal that the wallet came online,
  except that it _might_ result in auto-shielding transactions for multiple
  transparent addresses being created at the same time. So we might want to
  special-case this?

Properties we want from auto-shielding:

- Auto-shielding transactions MUST NOT shield from multiple transparent receivers in
  the same transaction.
  - Doing so would trivially link diversified UAs containing transparent receivers.

Properties we want from auto-migration:

- Receipt of a shielded payment MUST NOT trigger any on-chain behaviour (as that
  reveals transaction linkability).

Both auto-shielding and auto-migration are time-triggered actions, not
receipt-triggered actions. An auto-shielding or auto-migration transaction MUST NOT
be created as a direct result of a payment being received.

Both of these are opportunistic: if the user's wallet is making a transaction in
which one of these actions would occur anyway, then the wallet takes the opportunity
to migrate as much as it would do if it were generating an autoshielding transaction.
This both saves on a transaction, and removes the need for any kind of transparent
change address within UAs.

TODO: what pool should change go to?

* Proposal: the most recent pool already involved in the transaction.

Wallet Recovery
---------------

In the case where we are recovering a wallet from a backed-up mnemonic phrase,
and not from a wallet.dat, we don't have enough information to figure out what
receiver types the user originally used when deriving each UA under an account.
We have a similar issue if someone exports a UFVK, derives an address from it,
and has a payment sent to the address: zcashd will detect the payment, but has
no way to figure out what address it should display in the UI. A wallet could
store this information in the memo field of change outputs, but that adds a
bunch of coordination to the problem, and assumes ongoing on-chain state
storage.

- If the receiver matches an address that the wallet knows was derived via
  ``z_getaddressforaccount``, show that UA as expected (matching the receiver
  types the user selected).
- If the receiver matches a UFVK in the wallet, and we are looking it up
  because we detected a received note in some block, show the UA with the
  default receiver types that zcashd was using as of that block height
  (ideally the earliest block height we detect), and cache this for future
  usage.
- For zcashd's current policy of "best and second-best shielded pools, plus
  transparent pool", that would mean Orchard, Sapling, and transparent for
  current block heights.
- For each release of a wallet, the wallet should specify a set of receiver
  types and an associated range of block heights during which the wallet
  will, by default, generate unified addresses using that set of receiver
  types.
- For zcashd we know how the policy evolves because each zcashd release has
  an approximate release height and End-of-Service height that defines the window.
- Subsequent releases of a wallet SHOULD NOT retroactively change their
  policies for previously defined block height ranges.
- If the receiver type for a note received at a given time is not a member
  of the set of receiver types expected for the range of block heights, the
  policy corresponding to the nearest block height range that includes that
  receiver type SHOULD be used.
- If the receiver matches a UFVK in the wallet, and we have no information
  about when this receiver may have been first used, show the UA
  corresponding to the most recent receiver types policy that includes the
  receiver's type.
- As part of this, we're also going to change the "Sapling receiver to
  UfvkId" logic to trial-decrypt after trying internal map, so that we will
  detect all receivers linked to UFVKs in the wallet, not just receivers in
  addresses generated via z_getaddressforaccount. The internal map lookup
  is then just an optimisation (and a future refactor to have Orchard do
  the same is possible, but for now we will only trial-decrypt so we don't
  need to refactor to access the Rust wallet). TODO: express this in a less
  zcashd-specific way.

TODO: Mention recommendations (not requirements) of receiver types based on
settled ('accepted') network upgrades, as defined in §3.3 of the
Zcash Protocol Specification, at the time of the release of the wallet.

TODO: Rationale subsection explaining why earliest block height at detection
and the rules/recommendations in place at that block height are preferred
over showing different UAs at different heights

References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#zip-0032] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets <zip-0032.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0032-wallet-usage] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets — Specification: Wallet usage <zip-0032.rst#specification-wallet-usage>`_
.. [#zip-0203] `ZIP 203: Transaction Expiry <zip-0203.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0316] `ZIP 316: Unified Addresses and Unified Viewing Keys <zip-0316.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0316-deriving-a-unified-address] `ZIP 316: Unified Addresses and Unified Viewing Keys — Deriving a Unified Address from a UIVK <zip-0316-deriving-a-unified-address-from-a-uivk.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0317] `ZIP 317: Proportional Transfer Fee Mechanism <zip-0317.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0320] `ZIP 320: Defining an Address Type to which funds can only be sent from Transparent Addresses <zip-0320.rst>`_
