
    ZIP: 255
    Title: Deployment of the NU6.1 Network Upgrade
    Owners: Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira@jacaranda.org>
    Credits: Arya
    Status: Proposed
    Category: Consensus / Network
    Created: 2025-05-06
    License: MIT
    Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/1011>


# Terminology

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as described in
BCP 14 [^BCP14] when, and only when, it appears in all capitals.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described
in ZIP 200. [^zip-0200]

The character § is used when referring to sections of the Zcash Protocol
Specification. [^protocol]

The terms "Mainnet" and "Testnet" are to be interpreted as described in
§ 3.12 ‘Mainnet and Testnet’. [^protocol-networks]


# Abstract

This proposal defines the deployment of the NU6.1 network upgrade.


# Specification

## NU6.1 deployment

The primary sources of information about NU6.1 consensus protocol changes are:

* The Zcash Protocol Specification [^protocol].
* ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism [^zip-0200].
* ZIP 271: Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox Disbursement [^zip-0271].
* ZIP 1016: Community And Coinholder Funding Model [^zip-1016].

The network handshake and peer management mechanisms defined in ZIP 201
[^zip-0201] also apply to this upgrade.

The following network upgrade constants [^zip-0200] are defined for the
NU6.1 upgrade:

CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID
: `0x4DEC4DF0`

ACTIVATION_HEIGHT (NU6.1)
: Testnet: 3536500
: Mainnet: 3146400

MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU6.1)
: Testnet: `170130`
: Mainnet: `170140`

For each network (Testnet and Mainnet), nodes compatible with NU6.1 activation
on that network MUST advertise a network protocol version that is greater
than or equal to the MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU6.1) for that activation.

## Backward compatibility

Prior to the network upgrade activating on each network, NU6.1 and pre-NU6.1
nodes are compatible and can connect to each other. However, NU6.1 nodes will
have a preference for connecting to other NU6.1 nodes, so pre-NU6.1 nodes will
gradually be disconnected in the run up to activation.

Once the network upgrades, even though pre-NU6.1 nodes can still accept the
numerically larger protocol version used by NU6.1 as being valid, NU6.1 nodes
will always disconnect peers using lower protocol versions.


# References

[^BCP14]: [Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14)

[^protocol]: [Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.0 or later](protocol/protocol.pdf)

[^protocol-networks]: [Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.0 [NU6.1 proposal]. Section 3.12: Mainnet and Testnet](protocol/protocol.pdf#networks)

[^zip-0200]: [ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism](zip-0200.rst)

[^zip-0201]: [ZIP 201: Network Peer Management for Overwinter](zip-0201.rst)

[^zip-0271]: [ZIP 271: Deferred Dev Fund Lockbox Disbursement](zip-0271.md)

[^zip-1016]: [ZIP 1016: Community and Coinholder Funding Model](zip-1016.md)
