::

  ZIP: 0
  Title: ZIP Process
  Owners: Jack Grigg <thestr4d@gmail.com>
          Mark Henderson <mark@shieldedlabs.net>
          Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira@jacaranda.org>
          Arya <arya@zfnd.org>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@nutty.land>
          Sam H. Smith <sam@shieldedlabs.net>
  Original-Authors: Josh Cincinnati
                    George Tankersley
                    Deirdre Connolly
                    Teor
                    Aditya Bharadwaj
                    Conrado Gouvêa
  Credits: Luke Dashjr
  Status: Active
  Category: Process
  Created: 2019-02-16
  License: BSD-2-Clause


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY",
"RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to
be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when,
they appear in all capitals.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as
described in ZIP 200. [#zip-0200]_


Abstract
========

A Zcash Improvement Proposal (ZIP) is a design document providing
information to the Zcash community, or describing a new feature for
Zcash or its processes or environment. The ZIP should provide a concise
technical specification of the feature and a rationale for the feature.

We intend ZIPs to be the primary mechanism for proposing new features,
for collecting community input on an issue, and for documenting the
design decisions that have gone into Zcash. The Owner(s) of the ZIP
(usually the authors(s)) are responsible for building consensus within
the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

Because the ZIPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository,
their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal.

This document is based partly on the work done by Luke Dashjr with
`BIP 2 <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0002.mediawiki>`__.


Specification
=============

ZIP Workflow
------------

The ZIP process begins with a new idea for Zcash. Each potential ZIP
MUST have Owners — one or more people who write the ZIP using the style
and format described below, shepherd the discussions in the appropriate
forums, and attempt to build community consensus around the idea. The
ZIP Owners should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea is ZIP-able.
Small enhancements or patches to a particular piece of software often
don't require standardisation between multiple projects; these don't
need a ZIP and should be injected into the relevant project-specific
development workflow with a patch submission to the applicable issue
tracker. Additionally, many ideas have been brought forward for changing
Zcash that have been rejected for various reasons. The first step should
be to search past discussions to see if an idea has been considered
before, and if so, what issues arose in its progression. After investigating
past work, the best way to proceed is usually by posting about the new
idea to the `Zcash Community Forum <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/>`__.

Vetting an idea publicly before going as far as writing a ZIP is meant
to save both the potential Owners and the wider community time. Asking
the Zcash community first if an idea is original helps prevent too much
time being spent on something that is guaranteed to be rejected based on
prior discussions (searching the internet does not always do the trick).
It also helps to make sure the idea is applicable to the entire
community and not just the Owners. Just because an idea sounds good to
the Owners does not mean it will work for most people in most areas
where Zcash is used. On the other hand, some Owners may already have
the experience and knowledge of the history of Zcash development needed
to determine whether the idea is applicable without this vetting step.

Once the Owners are convinced that an idea has some chance of
acceptance, a ZIP draft should be presented to the
`Zcash Community Forum <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/>`__.
Particularly in the case of first-time submitters, this gives the Owners
a chance to flesh out the ZIP draft to make it properly formatted and
of high quality. It can also allow concerns about the proposal to be
addressed at an early stage, potentially reducing the amount of re-work
required; however, addressing concerns at this stage is *not* a
requirement in order for a ZIP draft to be merged.

Following a discussion, the proposal should be submitted to the ZIPs git
repository [#zips-repo]_ as a pull request. This draft MUST be written
in ZIP style as described below, and named with an alias such as
``draft-zatoshizakamoto-42millionzec`` until the ZIP Editors have
assigned it a ZIP number (Owners MUST NOT self-assign ZIP numbers).

ZIP Owners are responsible for collecting community feedback on both
the initial idea and the ZIP draft before submitting it for review. However,
wherever possible, long open-ended discussions on forums should be avoided.
In some cases the need for a ZIP arises for technical or process reasons
that are not in doubt, in which case a forum discussion might not be
necessary.

It is highly recommended that a single ZIP contain a single key proposal
or new idea. The more focused the ZIP, the more successful it tends to
be. If in doubt, split your ZIP draft into several well-focused ones.

When the ZIP draft is complete, the ZIP Editors will assign the ZIP a
number (if that has not already been done) and one or more Categories,
and merge the pull request to the ZIPs git repository. The ZIP Editors
will not unreasonably reject a ZIP. Reasons for rejecting ZIPs include
duplication of effort, disregard for formatting rules, being too
unfocused or too broad, being technically unsound, not providing proper
motivation or not in keeping with the Zcash philosophy. For a ZIP to be
accepted it must meet certain minimum criteria. It must be a clear and
complete description of the proposed enhancement. The enhancement must
represent a net improvement. The proposed implementation, if applicable,
must be solid and must not complicate the protocol unduly.

The ZIP Owners may update the draft as necessary in the git repository.
Updates to drafts should also be submitted by the Owners as pull requests.

ZIP Numbering Conventions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ZIP Editors currently use the following conventions when numbering
ZIPs:

* if a ZIP directly corresponds to a BIP (Bitcoin Improvement Proposal),
  and the number doesn't clash, assign the same number;
* if it affects the consensus layer or the core protocol, assign a
  number in the range 200..299;
* if it affects only higher layers but is needed for interoperability
  between node implementations or other parts of the ecosystem, assign
  a number in the range 300..399;
* if it is specific to an implementation (e.g. `zebra` or `zcashd`),
  assign a number in the range 400..499;
* if it concerns Consensus Process, assign a number in the range 0..9
  or 1000..1199;
* if it only describes updates to existing ZIPs and/or the Zcash
  Protocol Specification (that will be a complete specification in
  themselves after deployment), assign a number in the range
  2000..2999.
* try to number ZIPs that should or will be deployed together
  consecutively (subject to the above conventions), and in a coherent
  reading order.

These conventions are subject to change by consensus of the ZIP Editors.

Transferring ZIP Ownership
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of ZIPs to a new
Owner. In general, we'd like to retain the original Owner as a
co-Owner of the transferred ZIP, but that's really up to the original
Owner. A good reason to transfer ownership is because the original
Owner no longer has the time or interest in updating it or following
through with the ZIP process, or has fallen off the face of the 'net
(i.e. is unreachable or not responding to email). A bad reason to
transfer ownership is because you don't agree with the direction of the
ZIP. We try to build consensus around a ZIP, but if that's not possible,
you can always submit a competing ZIP.

If you are interested in assuming ownership of a ZIP, send a message
asking to take over, addressed to all of the current Owner(s) and the
ZIP Editors. If the Owner(s) who are proposed to be removed don't respond
in a timely manner, the ZIP Editors and any remaining current Owners will
make a decision (such decisions may be reversed).

If an author of a ZIP is no longer an Owner, an Original-Authors: field
SHOULD be added to the ZIP metadata indicating the original authorship
(without email addresses), unless the original author(s) request otherwise.

ZIP Editors
^^^^^^^^^^^

The current ZIP Editors are:

* Jack Grigg, Daira-Emma Hopwood, and Kris Nuttycombe in their individual
  capacities.
* Arya, associated with the Zcash Foundation.
* Mark Henderson and Sam H. Smith, associated with Shielded Labs.

All can be reached at zips@z.cash. The current design of the ZIP Process
dictates that there are always at least two ZIP Editors, including at least
one from the Zcash Foundation.

ZIP Editors MUST declare any potential or perceived conflict of interest
they have relating to their responsibilities as ZIP Editors.

Daira-Emma Hopwood declares a conflict of interest in acting as a ZIP Editor
and as Head of Research and Assurance at Znewco, Inc., and will endeavour
to minimize the downsides of that confluence of roles as far as possible.
In particular, ze commits to stepping down from the ZIP Editor role after
the deployment of Zcash Shielded Assets, assuming ze is still in a
management role at a company primarily involved with the development of
Zcash at that point.

ZIP Editors MUST be publicly transparent about any external influence
or constraints that have been placed or attempted to be placed on their
actions as ZIP Editors (including from Zcash Foundation, Shielded Labs,
or other organizations with which the Editors are associated), whether
or not it affects those actions. This should not be interpreted as
requiring ZIP Editors to reveal knowledge of undisclosed security
vulnerabilities or mitigations.

Additional Editors may be selected, with their consent, by consensus
among the current Editors.

An Editor may be removed or replaced by consensus among the current
Editors. However, if the other ZIP Editors have consensus, an Editor
can not prevent their own removal.

Any Editor can resign by informing the other Editors in writing.

Whenever the ZIP Editors change, the new ZIP Editors SHOULD:

* review this ZIP to make sure it reflects current practice,
* update the Owners of this ZIP,
* review access to the `ZIPs repository <https://github.com/zcash/zips>`_,
* update the <zips@z.cash> email alias, and
* invite new Editors to the Zcash Community Forum, and the #zips channel on Discord.

Whenever it has been at least 12 months since this ZIP was last reviewed
(whether or not that was a review in response to a ZIP Editor change), the
ZIP Editors SHOULD review this ZIP again to make sure that it reflects
current practice.

ZIP Editor Responsibilities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ZIP Editors subscribe to the `Zcash Community Forum.
<https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/>`__

Each new ZIP draft SHOULD be submitted as a "pull request" to the ZIPs
git repository [#zips-repo]_. It SHOULD NOT contain a ZIP number unless
one had already been assigned by the ZIP Editors. The ZIP content
SHOULD be submitted in reStructuredText [#rst]_ or Markdown [#markdown]_
format, and the Status field MUST initially be set to Draft. Generated
HTML MUST NOT be included in the pull request.

For each new ZIP draft that is received, the ZIP Editors SHOULD:

* Read the ZIP draft to check if it is ready: sound and complete. The
  ideas must make technical sense, even if they don't seem likely to be
  accepted. See `Reviewing a ZIP`_ below for further detail.
* Check that the Title, Category, and other metadata fields accurately
  describe the content.
* Ensure that a PR has been created for the ZIP draft in the ZIPs git
  repository [#zips-repo]_.
* Ensure that the existence of the draft has been announced on the Zcash
  Community Forum and the `#zips` channel of the Zcash R&D Discord.
* Check that the licensing terms are acceptable for ZIPs.

For proposals to revise an existing ZIP, the ZIP Editors SHOULD:

* Read the proposed modification to check if it is ready: sound,
  complete, and non-disruptive to the ZIP's existing deployments if any.
  See `Reviewing a ZIP`_ below for further detail.
* If the proposed changes primarily affect already-deployed aspects
  of the Zcash consensus protocol, they SHOULD be specified in an
  "Update ZIP" describing the changes to be made, rather than directly
  as a pull request modifying the existing ZIP(s) or the Zcash Protocol
  Specification. At the discretion of the ZIP Editors, this might not
  be needed for compatible changes or clarifications.
* If a change is to be made to an existing ZIP, check that the Title,
  Category, and other metadata fields still accurately describe the
  modified content.
* If the ZIP has a Change History section, check that it is accurately
  updated. If it does not, consider whether the ZIP is a "living ZIP",
  and whether a Change History section would be beneficial.
* Ensure that the update has been submitted as a PR to the ZIPs git
  repository [#zips-repo]_.
* If the proposed update is substantive and not merely editorial,
  ensure that it has been announced on the Zcash Community Forum and
  the `#zips` channel of the Zcash R&D Discord.
* Check that the licensing terms are still acceptable for ZIPs.

Announcing new ZIP drafts and updated ZIPs helps ensure transparency and
encourages timely community engagement and feedback. Such announcements
SHOULD clearly state the ZIP number, title, and a brief summary.

If an Update ZIP is accepted, it is the responsibility of the ZIP Editors
to apply the changes it describes to any existing specifications, but
this MUST only be done once the Status of the Update ZIP has reached at
least Proposed.

If a new Revision is added to a ZIP, then its original deployment is
called Revision 0. In some cases the revisions of a ZIP may have
differing deployment Status, which is expressed in the Status field as
described in `ZIP Status Field`_ below.

The ZIP Editors are also generally responsible for adminstration and
access control of the ZIPs repository [#zips-repo]_.

Reviewing a ZIP
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Any ZIP Editor can suggest changes to a ZIP. These suggestions are the
opinion of the individual ZIP Editor. Any technical or process review that
ZIP Editors perform is expected to be independent of their contractual or
other relationships.

ZIP Owners are free to clarify, modify, or decline suggestions from ZIP Editors.
If the ZIP Editors make a change to a ZIP that the Owners object to, then the
Editors MUST either revert the change or provide a public rationale for
overriding the objection. Examples of reasons to override an objection could
be that the change is necessary in order to accurately document the ZIP's
deployment status, to call attention to a security or privacy issue or
significant community opposition, or to enforce a process requirement of this
or another ZIP.

If a previous publication or update is found after-the-fact to have been made
in a way that violated a process requirement, the ZIP Editors MAY revert it.

Any changes to a ZIP by the ZIP Editors SHOULD be communicated to the ZIP Owners.

Typically, the ZIP Editors suggest changes in two phases:

* `content review`: multiple ZIP Editors discuss the ZIP draft or update, and
  suggest changes to the overall content. This is a "big picture" review.
* `format review`: two ZIP Editors do a detailed review of the
  structure and format of the ZIP draft. This ensures the ZIP draft is
  consistent with other Zcash specifications.

The content review is where general weaknesses in the ZIP draft should
be identified, which might include:

* Insufficient or unclear motivation.
* Unclear, under-documented, or missing privacy implications.
* Significant objectives of the ZIP draft that are not clearly documented in
  the `Requirements` section.
* Missing trust assumptions.
* Security risks that are insufficiently addressed.
* Unaddressed backward compatibility issues.

In addition, ZIP Editors may request input from community security or
privacy experts for proposals with significant implications.

Note that it is not the primary responsibility of the ZIP Editors to
review proposals for security, correctness, or implementability.

If the ZIP draft isn't ready, the Editors SHOULD make suggestions to the Owners
for the ZIP draft to be revised.

If a pull request exclusively updates ZIP drafts owned by the PR creator (and is
free from spam, abusive or malicious content, etc.), then the ZIP Editors SHOULD
approve it without any need for substantive editorial review, so that the Owners
are able to merge their changes into the ``main`` branch essentially at will.

If changes to a ZIP draft are merged into ``main``, an issue tracking the
ZIP draft MUST be opened if one is not open already. In this situation, any
outstanding suggestions or comments that need to be addressed before the ZIP
draft can be converted to a numbered ZIP SHOULD be moved to this issue.

If the ZIP draft isn't ready, the Editors will send it back to the Owners for
revision, with specific instructions. This decision is made by consensus
among the current Editors.

Format review should generally occur after content review feedback has
been addressed, to avoid unnecessary document churn or merge conflicts.

When a ZIP draft is ready, the ZIP Editors will:

* Ensure that a unique ZIP number has been assigned in the pull request.
* Regenerate the corresponding HTML documents, if required.
* Remove Draft status and merge the pull request.

The ZIP editors monitor ZIP changes and update ZIP headers as
appropriate.

Rejecting a ZIP or update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ZIP Editors MAY reject a new ZIP draft or an update to an existing ZIP,
by consensus among the current Editors. Rejections can be based on any
of the following reasons:

* it violates the Zcash Code of Conduct [#conduct]_ ;
* it appears too unfocused or broad;
* it duplicates effort in other ZIPs without sufficient technical justification
  (however, alternative proposals to address similar or overlapping problems
  are not excluded for this reason);
* it has manifest security flaws (including being unrealistically dependent
  on user vigilance to avoid security weaknesses);
* it fails to adequately consider privacy implications;
* it disregards compatibility with the existing Zcash blockchain or ecosystem;
* it is manifestly unimplementable;
* it includes buggy code, pseudocode, or algorithms;
* it manifestly violates common expectations of a significant portion of the
  Zcash community;
* it updates a ZIP's status, or fails to make a needed status update, in a way
  inconsistent with the requirements in `Specification of Status Workflow`_;
* in the case of a Proposed, Active, Implemented, or Final ZIP, the update
  makes a substantive change to which there is significant community opposition;
* it is dependent on a patent that could potentially be an obstacle to
  adoption of the ZIP;
* it includes commercial advertising or spam;
* it disregards formatting rules;
* it makes non-editorial edits to previous entries in a ZIP's Change History,
  if there is one;
* an update to an existing ZIP extends or changes its scope to an extent
  that would be better handled as a separate ZIP;
* a new ZIP draft has a category that does not reflect its content, or an update
  would change a ZIP to an inappropriate category;
* it violates any specific "MUST" or "MUST NOT" rule in this document;
* the expressed political views of a Owner of the document are inimical
  to the Zcash Code of Conduct [#conduct]_ (except in the case of an update
  removing that Owner);
* it is not authorized by the stated ZIP Owners;
* it removes an Owner without their consent (unless the reason for removal
  is directly related to a breach of the Code of Conduct by that Owner);
* it violates a conformance requirement of any Active Process ZIP
  (including this ZIP).

The ZIP Editors MUST NOT unreasonably deny publication of a ZIP draft
or update that does not violate any of these criteria. If they refuse a
proposal or update, they MUST give an explanation of which of the
criteria were violated, with the exception that spam may be deleted
without an explanation.

Communicating with the ZIP Editors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please send all ZIP-related communications either:

* by email to <zips@z.cash>,
* by opening an issue on the `ZIPs issue tracker <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues>`_, or
* by sending a message in the `#zips channel on the Zcash R&D Discord <https://discord.com/channels/809218587167293450/809251050741170187>`_.

**All communications should abide by the Zcash Code of Conduct** [#conduct]_.

ZIP Editor Meeting Practices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ZIP Editors SHOULD meet on a regular basis to review draft changes to
ZIPs. Meeting times are agreed by consensus among the current ZIP Editors.
A ZIP Editor meeting can be held even if some ZIP Editors are not available, but
all Editors SHOULD be informed of significant decisions that are likely to be made
at upcoming meetings.

The ZIP Editors will appoint a ZIP Secretary, which can be a shared or rotating
role. The ZIP Secretary will:

* share a draft agenda with the ZIP Editors at least 24 hours before each ZIP Editors' meeting;
* share draft minutes of significant decisions with the ZIP Editors in the week after the
  ZIP Editors' meeting; and
* share significant ZIP changes, including significant changes of status (in
  particular, progression of a ZIP to Proposed status), on the Zcash Community
  Forum.

If the draft agenda is empty, any ZIP Editor MAY submit agenda items, or suggest
that the meeting is cancelled.

ZIP format and structure
------------------------

ZIPs SHOULD be written in reStructuredText [#rst]_, Markdown [#markdown]_,
or LaTeX [#latex]_. For ZIPs written in LaTeX, a ``Makefile`` MUST be
provided to build (at least) a PDF version of the document.

Each ZIP SHOULD have the following parts:

* Preamble — Headers containing metadata about the ZIP (`see
  below <#zip-header-preamble>`__).
  The License field of the preamble indicates the licensing terms,
  which MUST be acceptable according to `the ZIP licensing requirements <#zip-licensing>`__.

* Terminology — Definitions of technical or non-obvious terms used
  in the document.

* Abstract — The abstract SHOULD be a concise summary (approximately
  200 words) that clearly describes the issue the ZIP addresses, the
  proposed solution, and the intended outcome. The ZIP MUST remain
  complete without the abstract.

  The abstract SHOULD, as far as practical, provide enough context for
  readers to quickly understand what the ZIP is about, why it matters,
  and how it fits into the broader Zcash ecosystem. In addition to
  summarizing the technical content, the abstract SHOULD briefly mention
  any significant privacy implications. The abstract should not be
  vague or overly generic, but should serve as a faithful, high-level
  summary of the proposal that enables reviewers to understand the key
  ideas and potential implications without reading the entire document.

* Motivation — The motivation is critical for ZIPs that want to change
  the Zcash protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing
  protocol is inadequate to address the problem that the ZIP solves.

* Privacy Implications — This section SHOULD be present if the ZIP makes
  trade-offs or assumptions that could impact the privacy of Zcash users
  or protocol participants. Since this section is not part of the
  Specification, it MUST NOT directly include or duplicate conformance
  requirements on implementations or processes. Instead it contains a
  high-level overview of the privacy implications that may need to be
  considered for deployment of the ZIP.

  The contents of this section could include, for example, trust assumptions
  affecting privacy that are introduced or modified by the proposal; privacy
  trade-offs or changes to anonymity guarantees; potential data leakage
  (e.g., from metadata, timing, or usage patterns); and exposure to known
  or novel privacy attack vectors. Proposals SHOULD consider any relevant
  threat model(s), and SHOULD propose updates to those threat models if the
  ZIP introduces new privacy-relevant assumptions or risks not currently
  addressed.

  If a change affects how wallets construct, interpret, or expose
  transaction data, or modifies user-facing protocol behavior, the ZIP
  SHOULD assess the implications for user privacy in that context.

* Requirements — This section describes high-level goals that the
  Specification MUST ensure. It MUST NOT itself include conformance
  requirements, so that it is possible to perform a consistency check
  that what is specified meets the Requirements.

* Specification — The technical specification should describe the
  interface and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be
  detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for
  any of the current Zcash platforms.

* Rationale — The rationale fleshes out the specification by
  describing what motivated the design and why particular design
  decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were
  considered and related work. The rationale should provide evidence of
  consensus within the community and discuss important objections or
  concerns raised during discussion.

  For longer ZIPs it can potentially be easier to have inline Rationale
  subsections interspersed throughout the Specification part. When taking
  this approach, the content of these subsections should be annotated
  with HTML tags to make it collapsible (so the rationale is available
  for review but doesn't get in the way of reading the specification).
  ZIPs written in Markdown can use the following syntax (note the
  newline after the ``<summary>`` tag)::

    # Specification

    ## Foobar

    Important details.

    <details>
    <summary>

    ### Rationale for foobar
    </summary>

    Important but hidden rationale!
    </details>

  ZIPs written in reStructuredText can use the following syntax::

    Specification
    =============

    Foobar
    ------

    Important details.

    Rationale for foobar
    ''''''''''''''''''''

    .. raw:: html

       <details>
       <summary>Click to show/hide</summary>

    Important but hidden rationale!

    .. raw:: html

       </details>

* Reference implementation — Literal code implementing the ZIP's
  specification, and/or a link to the reference implementation of
  the ZIP's specification. The reference implementation MUST be
  completed before any ZIP is given status “Implemented” or “Final”,
  but it generally need not be completed before the ZIP is accepted
  into “Proposed”.

* Change History — A list of dates, each with details of any semantic changes
  made to the ZIP (not editorial changes). This section is OPTIONAL; if present,
  the Preamble MUST include a Last-Updated field. It is RECOMMENDED to include
  this section in "living ZIPs" (Released ZIPs to which semantic changes are
  made after their initial transition out of Draft). If a ZIP that already
  contains a Change History section is modified with semantic changes, the
  Change History section and Last-Updated field MUST also be updated.

ZIP stubs
^^^^^^^^^

A ZIP stub records that the ZIP Editors have reserved a number for a
ZIP that is under development. It is not a ZIP, but exists in the ZIPs
git repository [#zips-repo]_ at the same path that will be used for the
corresponding ZIP if and when it is published. It consists only of a
preamble, which MUST use Reserved as the value of the Status field.

ZIP stubs can be added and removed, or replaced by the corresponding ZIP,
at the discretion of the ZIP Editors. If a ZIP stub is removed then its
number MAY be reused, possibly for an entirely different ZIP.

ZIP header preamble
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each ZIP or ZIP stub MUST begin with a RFC 822-style header preamble.
For ZIPs and ZIP stubs written in reStructuredText, this is represented
as ``::`` on the first line, followed by a blank line, then the preamble
indented by 2 spaces.

The following header fields are REQUIRED for ZIPs::

  ZIP:
  Title:
  Owners:
  Status:
  Category:
  Created:
  License:

The following additional header fields are OPTIONAL for ZIPs::

  Credits:
  Original-Authors:
  Discussions-To:
  Pull-Request:
  Last-Updated:
  Obsoleted-By:
  Updated-By:
  Obsoletes:
  Updates:

For ZIP stubs, only the ZIP:, Title:, Status:, and Category: fields
are REQUIRED. Typically the other fields applicable to ZIP stubs are
Credits:, Discussions-To: and Pull-Request:, which are OPTIONAL.

The Owners header lists the names and email addresses of all the
Owners of the ZIP. The format of the Owners header value SHOULD be::

  Random J. User <address@dom.ain>

If there are multiple Owners, each should be on a separate line.

Credits: and Original-Authors: fields SHOULD NOT include email addresses.

The "Owners", "Credits", and "Original-Authors" headers always use
these plural spellings even there is only one Owner, one person to be
credited, or one original author.

While a ZIP is in public discussions (usually during the initial Draft
phase), a Discussions-To header will indicate the URL where the ZIP is
being discussed. No Discussions-To header is necessary if the ZIP is being
discussed privately with the Owner.

The Pull-Request header, if present, gives an URL to a Pull Request for
the ZIP.

The Category header specifies the type of ZIP, as described in
`ZIP categories`_. Multiple categories MAY be specified, separated by
" ``/`` ".

The Created header records the date that the ZIP was submitted.
Dates should be in yyyy-mm-dd format, e.g. 2001-08-14.

For ZIPs written in reStructuredText, URLs in header fields SHOULD be
surrounded by ``<`` ``>``; this ensures that the link is rendered correctly.

Auxiliary Files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ZIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Auxiliary files
should be included in a subdirectory for that ZIP; that is, for any ZIP
that requires more than one file, all of the files SHOULD be in a
subdirectory named zip-XXXX.

ZIP categories
--------------

Each ZIP is in one or more of the following categories, as specified
in the Category header:

Consensus
   Rules that affect the consensus protocol followed by all Zcash
   implementations.
Standards
   Non-consensus changes affecting most or all Zcash implementations, or
   the interoperability of applications using Zcash.
Process
   A Process ZIP describes a process surrounding Zcash, or proposes a
   change to (or an event in) a process. They may propose an implementation,
   but not to Zcash's codebase; they often require community consensus;
   unlike Informational ZIPs, they are more than recommendations, and users
   are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures,
   guidelines, changes to the decision-making process, and changes to the
   tools or environment used in Zcash development.
Consensus Process
   A subcategory of Process ZIP that specifies requirements and processes
   that are to be realized by one or more Consensus ZIPs, and/or by social
   consensus of the Zcash community.
Informational
   An Informational ZIP describes non-consensus Zcash design issues, or
   general guidelines or information for the Zcash community. These ZIPs
   do not necessarily represent a Zcash community consensus or
   recommendation, so users and implementors are free to ignore
   Informational ZIPs or follow their advice.
Network
   Specifications of peer-to-peer networking behaviour.
RPC
   Specifications of the RPC interface provided by `zebra` or `zcashd` nodes.
Wallet
   Specifications affecting wallets (e.g. non-consensus changes to how
   transactions, addresses, etc. are constructed or interpreted).
Ecosystem
   Specifications otherwise useful to the Zcash ecosystem.

New categories may be added by consensus among the ZIP Editors.

Consensus and Standards ZIPs SHOULD have a Reference Implementation section,
which includes or (more often) links to an implementation.

Consensus ZIPs SHOULD have a Deployment section, describing how and when
the consensus change is planned to be deployed (for example, in a particular
network upgrade).

ZIP Status Field
----------------

* Reserved: The ZIP Editors have reserved this ZIP number, and there MAY
  be a Pull Request for it, but no ZIP has been published. The ZIP Editors
  SHOULD publish a stub header so that the reservation appears in the
  `ZIP index <https://zips.z.cash#index-of-zips>`__. This status MUST
  only be used for ZIP stubs.

* Draft: All initial ZIP submissions have this status.

* Withdrawn: The Owners of a ZIP MAY remove it from consideration by
  the community, by changing its status to Withdrawn (in a PR or by
  request to the ZIP Editors).

* Active: Typically only used for Process or Informational ZIPs, achieved
  once rough consensus on a Proposed ZIP is reached in PR/forum posts.

* Proposed: Typically the stage after Draft, added to a ZIP after
  consideration, feedback, and rough consensus from the community.

* Rejected: If no progress on a Draft or Proposed ZIP has been made for
  one year, the ZIP Editors SHOULD move it to Rejected status. It can
  revert back to Draft or Proposed if the Owners resume work or resolve
  issues preventing consensus.

* Implemented: When a Consensus or Standards ZIP has a working
  reference implementation but before activation on the Zcash network.
  The status MAY indicate which node implementation has implemented
  the ZIP, e.g. "Implemented (zebra)" or "Implemented (zcashd)".

* Final: When a Consensus or Standards ZIP is both implemented and
  activated on the Zcash network.

* Obsolete: The status when a ZIP is no longer relevant (typically when
  superseded by another ZIP).

If a ZIP has multiple Revisions, they may have differing deployment
status. In that case the status of every Revision SHOULD be specified,
using the format "[Revision 0] <Status-0>, [Revision 1] <Status-1>, ..."
where "<Status-n>" is one of the alternatives above.

Once any Revision has been Released (as defined in the next section),
all subsequent Revisions MUST also be at least Proposed (that is,
they MUST NOT be Reserved or Draft). For example, a status such as:

  [Revision 0] Final, [Revision 1] Draft

is not valid, because changes that are in Draft should not have been
applied yet.

Specification of Status Workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Owners of a ZIP MAY decide on their own to change the status between
Draft or Withdrawn. All other changes in status MUST be approved by
consensus among the current ZIP Editors.

A ZIP SHOULD only change status from Draft (or Rejected) to Proposed,
when the Owner deems it is complete and there is rough consensus on the
forums, validated by consensus among the current ZIP Editors. If it's a
Consensus ZIP, a Deployment section MUST be present in order for the ZIP
to change status to Proposed. Typically, although not necessarily, this
will specify a network upgrade in which the consensus change is to activate.

A ZIP's status is Released if it is Proposed, Active, Implemented, or Final
(i.e. not Draft, Rejected, Obsolete, or Withdrawn).

A ZIP that has significant security or privacy implications MUST NOT
be changed from a non-Released status to a Released status without the
design having undergone independent security review from qualified
security or privacy experts. Similarly, changes to a Released ZIP that might
invalidate the conclusions of previous security or privacy review, or leave
significant security or privacy implications unaddressed, MUST undergo
further independent review.

A ZIP SHOULD NOT be changed from a non-Released status to a Released
status if there is significant community opposition to its content.
(However, Draft ZIPs explicitly MAY describe proposals to which there
is, or could be expected, significant community opposition.)

A Released ZIP MUST NOT be changed to a non-Released status if the
specification is already implemented and is in common use, or where a
Process ZIP still reflects a consensus of the community.

A Standards ZIP SHOULD only change status from Proposed to Implemented
once the Owners provide an associated reference implementation. For
Consensus ZIPs, an implementation MUST have been merged into at least
one consensus node codebase (currently `zebra` and/or `zcashd`), typically
in the period after the network upgrade's specification freeze but before
the implementation audit. If the Owners miss this deadline, the Editors
or Owners MAY choose to update the Deployment section of the ZIP to
target another upgrade, at their discretion.

A Process or Informational ZIP SHOULD change status from Proposed to
Active when it achieves rough consensus on the forum or PR. Such a
proposal is said to have rough consensus if it has been substantially
complete and open to discussion on the forum or GitHub PR for at least
one month, has been in Proposed status for at least one week, and no
person maintains any unaddressed substantiated objections to it. Addressed
or obstructive objections can be ignored/overruled by general agreement
that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning MUST be
given in such circumstances.

When an Active, Implemented, or Final ZIP is no longer relevant –for
example because its implementation has fallen out of use or its process
is no longer followed– its status SHOULD be changed to Obsolete. This
change MUST also be objectively verifiable and/or discussed. Final ZIPs
MAY be updated; the specification is still in force but modified by
another specified ZIP or ZIPs (check the optional Updated-By header).

If a non-editorial update is made to an Obsolete, Withdrawn, or
Rejected ZIP, its status MUST be changed appropriately.

The above process also applies to any subsequent Revisions of a ZIP.

ZIP Comments
------------

Comments from the community on the ZIP should occur on the Zcash
Community Forum and the comment fields of the pull requests in
any open ZIPs. Editors will use these sources to judge rough consensus.

ZIP Licensing
-------------

New ZIPs may be accepted with the following licenses. Each new ZIP MUST
identify at least one acceptable license in its preamble. Each license
MUST be referenced by their respective abbreviation given below.

For example, a preamble might include the following License header::

  License: BSD-2-Clause
           GNU-All-Permissive

In this case, the ZIP text is fully licensed under both the OSI-approved
BSD 2-clause license as well as the GNU All-Permissive License, and
anyone may modify and redistribute the text provided they comply with
the terms of *either* license. In other words, the license list is an
"OR choice", not an "AND also" requirement.

It is also possible to license source code differently from the ZIP
text. This case SHOULD be indicated in the Reference Implementation
section of the ZIP. Again, each license MUST be referenced by its
respective abbreviation given below.

Statements of code licenses in ZIPs are only advisory; anyone intending
to use the code should look for license statements in the code itself.

ZIPs are not required to be *exclusively* licensed under approved
terms, and MAY also be licensed under unacceptable licenses
*in addition to* at least one acceptable license. In this case, only the
acceptable license(s) should be listed in the License header.


Recommended licenses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* MIT: `Expat/MIT/X11 license <https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT>`__
* BSD-2-Clause: `OSI-approved BSD 2-clause
  license <https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause>`__
* BSD-3-Clause: `OSI-approved BSD 3-clause
  license <https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause>`__
* CC0-1.0: `Creative Commons CC0 1.0
  Universal <https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>`__
* GNU-All-Permissive: `GNU All-Permissive
  License <https://www.gnu.org/prep/maintain/html_node/License-Notices-for-Other-Files.html>`__
* Apache-2.0: `Apache License, version
  2.0 <https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>`__

In addition, it is RECOMMENDED that literal code included in the ZIP, or
written for and linked by the ZIP, be multi-licensed under the union of the
license(s) of the project(s) it is intended to be used by. In particular,
code intended for `zebra`, `zcashd`, `Zallet`, `Zaino`, or their dependencies
SHOULD be multi-licensed under at least the MIT and Apache-2.0 license terms.

If a ZIP links to a reference implementation that does not follow the above
recommendation, its license terms MUST be documented in the ZIP.

Not recommended, but acceptable licenses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* BSL-1.0: `Boost Software License, version
  1.0 <https://www.boost.org/LICENSE_1_0.txt>`__
* CC-BY-4.0: `Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
  International <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>`__
* CC-BY-SA-4.0: `Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
  International <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>`__
* FDL-1.3: `GNU Free Documentation License, version
  1.3 <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.en.html>`__

Not acceptable licenses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All licenses not explicitly included in the above lists are not
acceptable terms and MUST NOT be used for a Zcash Improvement Proposal.

Rationale
^^^^^^^^^

Bitcoin's BIP 1 allowed the Open Publication License or releasing into
the public domain; was this insufficient?

* The OPL is generally regarded as obsolete, and not a license suitable
  for new publications.
* The OPL license terms allowed for the author to prevent publication
  and derived works, which was widely considered inappropriate.
* In some jurisdictions, releasing a work to the public domain is not
  recognised as a legitimate legal action, leaving the ZIP simply
  copyrighted with no redistribution or modification allowed at all.

Why are there software licenses included?

* Some ZIPs, especially in the Consensus category, may include literal
  code in the ZIP itself which may not be available under the exact
  license terms of the ZIP.
* Despite this, not all software licenses would be acceptable for
  content included in ZIPs.

Why are GPL/AGPL/LGPL-style licenses not included?

* No existing ZIP had used these licenses.
* There is no reason to use such licenses for documentation, and including
  literal code under these licenses in a ZIP could undesirably affect the
  distribution terms of the ZIP as a whole.
* If necessary, code under such licenses can be linked for informational
  purposes, or as long as its incompatibility with the `zebra`, `zcashd`,
  `Zallet`, and/or `Zaino` licenses is noted.


See Also
========

* `RFC 7282: On Consensus and Humming in the
  IETF <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7282.html>`__
* `Zcash Network Upgrade Pipeline <https://electriccoin.co/blog/the-zcash-network-upgrade-pipeline/>`__


Acknowledgements
================

We thank George Tankersley, Deirdre Connolly, Teor, Aditya Bharadwaj, and
Conrado Gouvêa for their past contributions as ZIP Editors.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#conduct] `Zcash Code of Conduct <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/blob/master/code_of_conduct.md>`_
.. [#rst] `reStructuredText documentation <https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html>`_
.. [#markdown] `The Markdown Guide <https://www.markdownguide.org/>`_
.. [#latex] `LaTeX — a document preparation system <https://www.latex-project.org/>`_
.. [#zips-repo] `ZIPs git repository <https://github.com/zcash/zips>`_
