::

  ZIP: 2002
  Title: Explicit Fees
  Owners: Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira@jacaranda.org>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@nutty.land>
          Jack Grigg <thestr4d@gmail.com>
  Credits: Simon Liu
  Status: Draft
  Category: Consensus
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/803>
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/919>


Terminology
===========

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
[#BCP14]_ when, and only when, it appears in all capitals.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in
ZIP 200. [#zip-0200]_

The character § is used when referring to sections of the Zcash Protocol
Specification. [#protocol]_

The terms "Mainnet" and "Testnet" are to be interpreted as described in
§ 3.12 ‘Mainnet and Testnet’. [#protocol-networks]_


Abstract
========

This proposal makes the transaction fee explicit in the v6 transaction format,
as an entry in the transparent transaction value pool balance map defined in
ZIP 248 [#zip-0248]_. Instead of fees being implicit in the difference between
the input value and output value of the transaction, all value transfers,
including fee transfers to miners, will be explicit and committed to via the
txid.


Motivation
==========

When it comes to fee selection, it should be very hard to make mistakes.
The current transparent fee computation (inherited from Bitcoin) — input value
less output value — is prone to user error. It is very easy to forget to add an
output for a change address, make a calculation error [#bitcointalk-fee-error]_,
mix up units etc.

In addition, when signing a transaction with a hardware wallet, using an implicit 
fee means that the hardware wallet must recompute the fee on its own and cannot
simply display the value being committed to.

Finally, this change will make it possible for light clients to determine the
fee paid by a transaction without needing to download and inspect transparent
inputs to the transaction.


Requirements
============

Parties that see a transaction, even in isolation, reliably know its fee.
That is, the fee must be explicit in the encoding of the transaction,
and no potentially error-prone calculations or additional chain data are 
needed to compute it.


Specification
=============

Changes to ZIP 248
------------------

This ZIP proposes to register bundle type 4 ("Transaction fee") in the V6
transaction bundle type registry defined in ZIP 248 [#zip-0248]_.

+------------+----------------------+--------------------+------------------+
| BundleType | ``mValuePoolDeltas`` | ``mEffectBundles`` | ``mAuthBundles`` |
+============+======================+====================+==================+
| 4          |✅                    |❌                  |❌                |
+------------+----------------------+--------------------+------------------+

The fee bundle has no effecting data and no authorizing data. The transaction
fee is represented solely as an entry in ``mValuePoolDeltas`` with
``bundleType = 4`` and ``assetClass = 0`` (ZEC).

For non-coinbase transactions, the ``value`` field of this entry MUST be
nonpositive, representing the fee being removed from the transparent
transaction value pool. For coinbase transactions, the ``value`` field MUST be
nonnegative, representing the total fees collected from other transactions in
the block being added to the ZEC transparent transaction value pool.

Changes to the Zcash Protocol Specification
-------------------------------------------

Let $\mathsf{FeeBundleId} = 4.$

Let $\mathsf{Zec}$ be the asset UUID for ZEC as defined in ZIP 248 [#zip-0248]_.

In § 3.4 'Transactions and Treestates' [#protocol-transactions]_ (last modified by
ZIP 236 [#zip-0236]_), add the following consensus rules:

  * [NU7 onward] The ``assetClass`` for any entry in ``mValuePoolDeltas`` having
    ``bundleType`` $= \mathsf{FeeBundleId}$ MUST be 0. That is, fee amounts MUST
    be denominated in ZEC.

  * [NU7 onward] For v6 and later non-coinbase transactions, the value of
    $\mathsf{mValuePoolDeltas}[(\mathsf{FeeBundleId}, \mathsf{Zec})]$ MUST be
    nonpositive. Its absolute value represents the transaction fee in zatoshis.

  * [NU7 onward] For v6 and later coinbase transactions, the value of
    $\mathsf{mValuePoolDeltas}[(\mathsf{FeeBundleId}, \mathsf{Zec})]$ MUST be
    nonnegative. It represents the total transaction fees collected from all
    other transactions in the block.

In § 7.1 'Transaction Encoding and Consensus' [#protocol-txnconsensus]_, add:

  [NU7 onward] The absolute value of the fee bundle's value pool delta MUST
  be in the range $\{ 0 .. \mathsf{MAX\_MONEY} \}$.


Modifications to Digest Algorithms
----------------------------------

The fee amount is committed to the transaction identifier and signature
digest via the ``value_pool_deltas_digest`` defined in ZIP 248 [#zip-0248]_.
Since the fee bundle (bundle type 4) has no effecting data and no authorizing
data, its only contribution to the transaction digest is through its entry
in ``mValuePoolDeltas``.


Applicability
-------------

All of these changes apply identically to Mainnet and Testnet.


Deployment
==========

This ZIP is proposed to be deployed with the next transaction version change,
which is assumed to be v6. [#zip-0230]_


Reference implementation
========================

TBD


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.2 [NU6.1] or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-transactions] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.2 [NU6.1]. Section 3.4: Transactions and Treestates <protocol/protocol.pdf#transactions>`_
.. [#protocol-networks] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.2 [NU6.1]. Section 3.12: Mainnet and Testnet <protocol/protocol.pdf#networks>`_
.. [#protocol-txnconsensus] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2025.6.2 [NU6.1]. Section 7.1.2: Transaction Consensus Rules <protocol/protocol.pdf#txnconsensus>`_
.. [#bitcointalk-fee-error] `Bitcoin Forum post by @Voiceeeeee, March 8, 2017. "PLEASE HELP.. I sent a transaction with a 2.5 BTC transaction fee" <https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1818791.0>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0230] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format <zip-0230.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0236] `ZIP 236: Blocks should balance exactly <zip-0236.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0248] `ZIP 248: Extensible Transaction Format <zip-0248.rst>`_
