```
ZIP: 233
Title: Establish the Zcash Sustainability Fund on the Protocol Level
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits:
Status: Draft
Category: Consensus / Ecosystem
Created: 2023-08-16
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL",
and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
[1]

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described
in ZIP 200. [2]

"Block Subsidy” - the algorithmic issuance of ZEC on block creation – part of
the consensus rules. Split between the miner and the Dev Fund. Also known as
Block Reward.

"Issuance" - The method by which unmined or unissued ZEC is converted to ZEC
available to users of the network

"We" - the ZIP authors, owners listed in the above front matter

"`MAX_MONEY`" is the ZEC supply cap. For simplicity, this ZIP defines it to be
`21,000,000 ZEC`, although this is slightly larger than the actual supply cap
of the original ZEC issuance mechanism.

# Abstract 

This ZIP describes the motivation, the necessary changes for, and the
implementation specifications for the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF). The ZSF
is a proposed alteration to the block rewards system and accounting of unmined
ZEC that allows for other sources of funding besides unissued ZEC. This new
mechanism for deposits -- that new applications or protocol designs can use to
strengthen the long-term sustainability of the network -- will likely be an
important step for future economic upgrades, such as a transition to Proof of
Stake or Zcash Shielded Assets, and other potential protocol fees and user
applications.

The changes in this ZIP are ultimately minimal, only requiring for the node to
track state in the form of a `ZSF_BALANCE`, and for a new transaction field to
be added, called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`. While wallet developer would be encouraged to
add the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field to their UIs, no changes or new behavior are
absolutely required for developers or ZEC holders.

This ZIP does not change the current ZEC block subsidy issuance schedule. Any
additional amounts paid into the sustainability fund are reserved for use in
future ZIPs.

# Motivation

The Zcash network's operation and development relies fundamentally on the block
reward system inherited from Bitcoin. This system currently looks like this:

- At Every New Block:
    - Miner and funding streams are rewarded a constant amount via unissued ZEC
      (this constant amount halves at specified heights)
    - Miner is rewarded via Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`

The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a proposed replacement to that payout
mechanism, with the relevant parts in *bold* below:

- **Unmined ZEC is now accounted for as `ZSF_BALANCE`**
- **Transaction includes optional contributions to ZSF via a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field**
- Thus, at Every New Block:
    - Miner and funding streams rewarded the same constant amount, **but from
      `ZSF_BALANCE`** (this constant amount still halves at specified heights)
    - Miner is rewarded via Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`, **where
      `outputs` includes the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` amount**

For example, an end-user wallet application could have an option to contribute
a portion of a transaction to the ZSF, which would be included in a
`ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in the transaction, to be taken into account by the Zcash
nodes.

This quite simple alteration has -- in our opinion -- a multitude of benefits:

1. **Long Term Consensus Sustainability:** This mechanism supports long-term
   consensus sustainability by addressing concerns about the sustainability of
   the network design shared by Bitcoin-like systems through the establishment
   of deposits into the Sustainability Fund to augment block rewards, ensuring
   long-term sustainability as the issuance rate of Zcash drops and newly
   issued ZEC decreases over time.
2. **Benefits to ZEC Holders:** Deposits to the ZSF slow down the payout of
   ZEC, temporarily reducing its available supply, benefiting current holders
   of unencumbered active ZEC in proportion to their holdings without requiring
   them to opt into any scheme, introducing extra risk, active oversight, or
   accounting complexity.
3. **Recovery of "Soft-Burned" Funds:** In some instances, such as miners not
   claiming all available rewards, some ZEC goes unaccounted for, though not
   formally burned. This proposal would recover it through the `ZSF_BALANCE`
   mechanism described below.

# Specification

In practice, The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a single global balance
maintained by the node state and contributed to via a single transaction field.
This provides the economic and security support described in the motivation
section, while also importantly keeping the fund payouts extremely simple to
describe and implement.

The two modifications are:
1. The re-accounting of unmined ZEC as a node state field called `ZSF_BALANCE`
2. The addition of a transaction field called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`

## `ZSF_BALANCE`

The ZEC issuance mechanism is re-defined to remove funds from `ZSF_BALANCE`,
which is initially set to `MAX_MONEY` at the genesis block.

Consensus nodes are then required to track new per-block state:

- `ZSF_BALANCE[height] : u64 [zatoshi]`

The state is a single 64 bit integer (representing units of `zatoshi`) at any
given block height, $\mathsf{height}$, representing the Sustainability Fund
balance at that height. The `ZSF_BALANCE` can be calculated using the following
formula:

$\mathsf{ZsfBalanceAfter}(\mathsf{height}) = \mathsf{MAX\_MONEY} + \sum_{h = 0}^{\mathsf{height}} (\mathsf{ZsfDeposit}(h) + \mathsf{Unclaimed}(h) - \mathsf{BlockSubsidy}(h))$

where $\mathsf{Unclaimed}(\mathsf{height})$ is the portion of the block subsidy
and miner fees that are unclaimed for the block at the given height. 

The block at height $\mathsf{height}$ commits to
$\mathsf{ZsfBalanceAfter}(\mathsf{height})$ as part of a new block commitment
in the block header, at the end of the `hashBlockCommitments` chain in
[ZIP-244](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0244#block-header-changes).

TODO ZIP editors: consider introducing a chain state commitment hash tree.
(When we get closer to the network upgrade, we will have a better idea what
commitments that network upgrade needs.)

## Deposits into the Sustainability Fund

Sustainability fund deposits can be made via the new `zsfDeposit` field. This
can be done by:
- ZEC fund holders, in non-coinbase transactions;
- Zcash miners, in coinbase transactions.

In transaction versions without this new field:
- unclaimed miner fees and rewards in **coinbase transactions** are re-defined
  as deposits into the sustainability fund, and
- there are no sustainability fund deposits from non-coinbase transactions.

Note: older transaction versions can continue to be supported after a network
upgrade. For example, NU5 supports both v4 and v5 transaction formats, for both
coinbase and non-coinbase transactions.

### `zsfDeposit` fields in transactions

Each transaction can dedicate some of its excess funds to the ZSF, and the
remainder becomes the miner fee, with any excess miner fee/reward going to the
ZSF

This is achieved by adding a new field to the common transaction fields
[#zip-0225-transaction-format]:

- `zsfDeposit : u64 [zatoshi]`

The `ZSF_BALANCE[H]` for a block at height `H` can be calculated given a value
of `ZSF_BALANCE[H-1]` and the set of transactions contained in that block.
First, the `ZSF_DEPOSIT[H]` is calculated based solely on `ZSF_BALANCE[H-1]`.
This is subtracted from the previous block's balance to be distributed as part
of the block reward. Second, the sum of all the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` fields of all
transactions in the block is added to the balance.


### Non-Coinbase Transactions

If the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field is not present in an older transaction version, it
is defined to be zero for non-coinbase transactions.

#### Consensus Rule Changes

- Transparent inputs to a transaction insert value into a transparent
  transaction value pool associated with the transaction. Transparent outputs
  **and sustainability fund deposits** remove value from this pool.

### Coinbase Transactions

Any excess miner fee/reward is sent to the ZSF.

In new blocks, this deposit is tracked via the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in coinbase
transactions. 

If the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field is not present in a coinbase transaction with an
older transaction version, it is defined as the value of any unspent miner fee
and miner reward. This re-defines these previously unspendable funds as ZSF
deposits.

#### Consensus Rule Changes

-  The remaining value in the transparent transaction value pool of a coinbase
   transaction is **deposited in the sustainability fund**.

### `ZSF_DEPOSIT` Requirements

- ZIP 230 [3] must be updated to include `ZSF_DEPOSIT`.
- ZIP 244 [4] must be updated as well to include `ZSF_DEPOSIT`.

# Rationale

All technical decisions in this ZIP are balanced between the necessary
robustness of the ZSF mechanics, and simplicity of implementation. 

## `ZSF_BALANCE` as node state

Tracking the `ZSF_BALANCE` value as a node state using the above formula is
very simple in terms of implementation, and should work correctly given that
the node implementations calculate the value according to the specifications.

## `ZSF_DEPOSIT` as explicit transaction field

An explicit value distinguishes the ZEC destined to Sustainability Fund
deposits from the implicit transaction fee. Explicitness also ensures any
arithmetic flaws in any implementations are more likely to be observed and
caught immediately.

# Deployment

This ZIP is proposed to activate with Network Upgrade (TODO ZIP editors).

# References

**[1]: [Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html)**

**[2]: [ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0200)**

**[3]: [ZIP 230: v6 transactions, including ZSAs](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/687)**

**[4]: [ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0244)**
