::

  ZIP: 1001
  Title: Keep the Block Distribution as Initially Defined — 90% to Miners
  Owners: mistfpga (zcash forums) <steve@mistfpga.net>
  Status: Obsolete
  Category: Consensus Process
  Created: 2019-08-01
  License: CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>
  Discussions-To: <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zip-proposal-keep-the-block-distribution-as-initaly-defined-90-to-miners/33843>


Terminology
===========

.. role:: editor-note

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT" in this document
are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when,
they appear in all capitals.

For clarity this ZIP defines these terms:

* Mining software in the context of this ZIP refers to pool software, local
  mining software, or staking software.
* Mining is defined as the action of processing transactions, so this would
  include proof of stake, if Zcash would switch to that.
* Mining coins transferred via fees are considered rewards (infinite), coins
  generated via block generation are considered distribution (finite).
* Block distribution is defined as the block reward minus transaction fees.
  :editor-note:`the protocol specification uses "block subsidy".`
* Spirit is defined as what is the intended outcome of the ZIP. [#spirit]_
* Initial promise is non-neutral language referencing the block distribution
  rules as initially set out. [#funding]_

.. [#spirit] If there is contradiction between Spirit and any other part of
   the proposal that needs to be addressed, in the event it is not addressed
   Spirit is assumed to overrule all.


Abstract
========

The spirit of this ZIP is to is to ensure that the Founders’ Reward ends.
It is not the intention of this ZIP to stop protocol-based donations.

It is a simple short ZIP.

Hopefully it will be compatible with a number of other ZIPs and can be
worked into them.


Out of Scope for this Proposal
==============================

* Governance on how decisions are made; this ZIP is not meant to be used as
  a form of governance.
* Future funding.
* It does not cover other donations or revenue streams.


Motivation
==========

* The Founders’ Reward is set to expire in 2020.
* To honour the initial promise of giving 90% of total block distribution to
  miners. Therefore the protocol will give them 100% of the block distribution
  after the first halving.


Requirements
============

* The Founders’ Reward MUST end at the first halving in October 2020.
* This ZIP does not preclude the Electric Coin Company from sourcing funding
  elsewhere, or from donations.


Specification
=============

* The existing Founders’ Reward consensus rules [#spec-subsidies]_
  [#spec-foundersreward]_ MUST be preserved.
* Specifically, ``FoundersReward(height)`` MUST equal ``0`` if
  ``Halving(height) >= 1``. (For clarity once the halving happens the
  Founders’ Reward stops, as per the rules outlined in [#spec-subsidies]_
  and [#spec-foundersreward]_.)
* This specification is only meant to stop the Founders’ Reward, not
  protocol-based donations.
* Enforcing some kind of mandatory donation via whatever mechanism would
  be seen as continuation of the Founders’ Reward.


Implications to other users
===========================

* Block distribution payouts to Founders’ Reward addresses will cease at
  the first halving.
* Pools and other software need to take this into account.


Technical implementation
========================

This ZIP requires no changes to current consensus implementations.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#funding] `Zcash blog: Funding, Incentives, and Governance. February 1, 2016 <https://electriccoin.co/blog/funding/>`_
.. [#spec-subsidies] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2019.0.8 exactly. Section 7.7: Calculation of Block Subsidy and Founders Reward <protocol/protocol.pdf#subsidies>`_
.. [#spec-foundersreward] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2019.0.8 exactly. Section 7.8: Payment of Founders’ Reward <protocol/protocol.pdf#foundersreward>`_
