::

  ZIP: 1007
  Title: Enforce Development Fund Commitments with a Legal Charter
  Owners: @lex-node (zcash forums)
          @mistfpga (zcash forums) <steve@mistfpga.net>
  Status: Obsolete
  Category: Consensus Process
  Created: 2019-08-24
  License: CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>
  Discussions-To: <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/dev-fund-supplemental-proposal-enforce-devfund-commitments-with-legal-charter/34709>


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only
when, they appear in all capitals.

For clarity this ZIP defines these terms:

* Covenant is defined as a legally binding agreement, upon which a specific
  aspect of development of the Zcash protocol and/or adoption is scheduled and
  agreed.


Abstract
========

A supplemental proposal to ensure feature selection and work is community-driven.

Hopefully it will be compatible with a number of other ZIPs and can be worked
into them.


Out of Scope for this Proposal
==============================

* This proposal does not address the merits, motivations or terms of any particular
  Development Funding Proposal.
* Requirements and Implementation.


Motivation and Requirements
===========================

.. role:: editor-note

This proposal is supplemental to any Development Funding Proposal that places or
purports to place conditions on how the Electric Coin Company (ECC) and the Zcash
Foundation (ZF) use development funds, or take other related off-chain actions such
as requirements and Covenants.

For example, the proposal [#zip-1006]_ provides that “[f]unds accruing to the
Zcash Development Fund MUST be used only for ... technical work directly connected
to the various software implementations of the Zcash protocol.” However, once
development funding is approved and implemented via a Network Upgrade, there will
be no enforcement mechanism to ensure that the ZF and ECC abide by this requirement.

This proposal aims to provide such an enforcement mechanism. If this proposal is
adopted, then the ECC and/or ZF, as applicable MUST enter into a legal agreement
that would entitle ZEC holders to enforce ECC’s/ZF’s performance of any Covenants.
For the purposes of this proposal we will refer to the legal agreement as the
“DevFund Charter” or “Charter” for short, but it MAY also be styled in other ways –
e.g. as a Constitution, Bylaws, Fund Governance Agreement, etc.

The DevFund Charter SHOULD be used to the benefit of all ZEC users, but the DevFund
Charter MAY provide that an enforcement action requires the support of the holders
of a plurality, majority or supermajority of ZEC. ZEC held by the ZF, ECC and their
officers, directors, employees and/or affiliates SHOULD be excluded from the
denominator in calculating the requisite plurality, majority or supermajority of ZEC.

:editor-note:`a "plurality" in a vote means the option that received more votes than
any other single option, but it is unclear how this applies to "a plurality of ZEC".
Taking into account experience from stake-weighted voting in other cryptocurrencies,
the threshold of a simple majority (50%), or more, of all *issued* ZEC voting for
any enforcement action would seem to be an extremely high bar.`

A quorum of yet-to-be-decided number of representatives from a number of groups
specified by the DevFund Charter MAY provide that an enforcement action requires
the support of the assigned representatives of each. One such mechanism SHOULD be
ZEC balance, however this would require a 66% majority or a 85% supermajority.
(These numbers are not binding and are up for discussion)

It is assumed that the Electric Coin Company, Zcash Foundation, or party with a
direct conflict of interest SHOULD identify their vote/signal - which MAY be rejected
from the vote.

Legal enforcement MAY occur in a court of law, non-binding mediation or binding
arbitration. The DevFund Charter MAY also provide rights to other Zcash community
constituencies, such as specified miners or the “Third Entity” contemplated by
[#zip-1006]_.


Rationale
=========

Because ZEC holders do not have specific legal rights against the ECC or ZF, but
MAY wish to condition renewed on-chain development funding on the ECC’s or ZF’s
agreement to use the development funds in certain ways, ZEC holders should have
the legal right to enforce ECC’s/ZF’s compliance with those agreements.


Specification
=============

* If a Development Funding Proposal receives sufficient community support and
  requires certain Covenants on the part of ECC or ZF, and there is also sufficient
  community support for using this enforcement mechanism as applied to that proposal,
  then one or more attorneys MUST be engaged to draft a Charter that reflects those
  Covenants, and the Charter MUST become legally effective and binding at the same
  time as the other aspects of the Development Funding Proposal are implemented
  on-chain (e.g., at the same time as activation of the corresponding Network Upgrade,
  if a Network Upgrade is is required to implement the Development Funding Proposal).

* Each pending Development Funding Proposal SHOULD be amended to specifically
  describe any Covenants that the ECC, ZF or any other relevant person or entity
  would be required to agree to as part of such Development Funding Proposal.


Open Issues
===========

* Whether a plurality, majority or supermajority of ZEC are required to approve an
  enforcement action against ECC or ZF;
* Logistics and technical implementation regarding the Charter, such as on-chain
  signalling/voting for enforcement;
* Remedies under the Charter, such as “specific performance” (getting a court to
  order ZF or ECC to comply with a Covenant);
* Discontinuation or reduction of development funding (which MAY occur by having
  Covenants that the ZF or ECC will prepare a Network Upgrade that discontinues or
  reduces development funding if so requested by holders of the requisite plurality,
  majority or supermajority of ZEC), etc.


Raised Concerns
===============

* “Code is Law; This is Just Law!”

  - Objection: Relying on off-chain legal mechanisms is contrary to the cypherpunk
    ethos and/or the mission/ethos of Zcash.
  - Answer: This is a values judgment that some people may reasonably hold. However,
    one should also consider that “don’t trust, verify” is also a cypherpunk
    principle and that the off-chain nature of some requirements means that a
    code-based solution is currently not possible; therefore, a legal enforcement
    mechanism, while imperfect, may be preferable to no enforcement mechanism.

* “Social Coordination Impracticality/Risk”

  - Objection: ZEC holders prize anonymity, but legal enforcement of breached
    Covenants will require social coordination (people must agree to enforce the
    action, and someone must actually get a lawyer and go to court). Therefore, this
    mechanism will not be valuable to ZEC holders and could lead them to compromise
    their anonymity and thus be worse than useless.
  - Answer: The community should further discuss how, in practice, ZEC holders might
    securely coordinate to bring an enforcement action against ECC and the ZF if it
    were needed. Additionally, it should be considered that the mere possibility of
    legal enforcement due to the clear terms of a Charter may dissuade ECC and ZF
    from violating Covenants and thus, paradoxically, having a Charter may also mean
    that no legal action ever becomes necessary. Additionally, the “class action”
    legal structure in some jurisdictions may mean that the ZEC holders' community
    could find a ‘champion’ in the form of a class-action attorney, without ZEC
    holders being required to personally become involved or ‘out themselves’ as
    ZEC holders (other than one willing ZEC holder as class representative).

* “This Will Just Waste Funding On Lawyers”

  - Objection: This Charter will be novel and bespoke, and lawyers may charge high
    fees to draft it and give assurances that it is enforceable. This wastes money
    that otherwise could be spent on Zcash development.
  - Answer: This is a valid concern. The Zcash community may be able to crowdsource
    an initial rough draft of the Charter from lawyers in the community or even
    non-lawyers who may be willing to do research and make an attempt at an initial
    draft. Lawyers could be involved primarily to issue-spot and formalize the
    initial draft. ECC and ZF may have law firms on retainer that could perform the
    work at favorable rates. Lawyers may be willing to work at discounted rates due
    to the unique opportunity and prestige of developing this innovative blockchain
    governance mechanism. Additionally, any legal fees may be small as a percentage
    of the overall value at stake, which may be considerable if a 5-20% development
    funding block reward is authorized.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#zip-1006] `ZIP 1006: Development Fund of 10% to a 2-of-3 Multisig with Community-Involved Third Entity <zip-1006.rst>`_
