::

  ZIP: 227
  Title: Issuance of Zcash Shielded Assets
  Owners: Daniel Benarroch <daniel@qed-it.com>
          Pablo Kogan <pablo@qed-it.com>
          Aurelien Nicolas <aurel@qed-it.com>
  Credits: Daira Hopwood
           Jack Grigg
           Vivek Arte
  Status: Draft
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2022-05-01
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/618>
 
Terminology
===========

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [#RFC2119]_.

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200 [#zip-0200]_.

The term "Orchard" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 224 [#zip-0224]_.

The terms "Asset", "custom Asset", and "Wrapped Asset" in this document are to be interpreted as described in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_.

We define the following additional terms:

- Issuance Action: an instance of a single issuance of a Zcash Shielded Asset. It defines the issuance of a single Asset identifier.
- Issuance Bundle: the bundle in the transaction that contains all the issuance actions of that transaction.

Abstract
========

ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_ and ZIP 227 [#zip-0227]_ propose in conjunction the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol, which is an extension of the Orchard protocol that enables the creation, transfer and burn of custom Assets on the Zcash chain. The creation of such Assets is defined in ZIP 227 [#zip-0227]_. The transfer and burn of such Assets is defined in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. This ZIP must only be implemented in conjuction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_, as the issuance mechanism is only valid for the ZSA transfer protocol, because it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.

Motivation
==========

This ZIP is a supporting ZIP for ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_, which lays out its motivations, but requires an issuance mechanism to be defined (which is substantial enough to stand on its own) in order to function.

Use Cases
=========

The design presented in this ZIP enables issuance of shielded Assets in various modes:

- The issuer knows in advance the receivers of the issued Asset.
- The Asset can be of non-fungible type, where each Asset type can be made part of a single “series”.
- The supply of the Asset can be limited in advance or not.
- The Asset can be a wrapped version of an Asset issued by another chain (as long as there is a bridge that supports transfer of that Asset between chains).

See the `Concrete Applications`_ section for more details.

Requirements
============

- Any user of the Zcash block chain can issue custom Assets on chain.
- The issuance mechanism should enable public tracking of the supply of the Assets on the Zcash block chain.
- Issuing or changing the attributes of a specific Asset should require cryptographic authorization.
- The Asset identification should be unique (among all shielded pools) and different issuer public keys should not be able to generate the same Asset identifier.


Specification
=============

As explained, the issuance protocol allows for a single issuance action to be sent to many receivers, by generating as many output notes as distinct recipients. Furthermore, every bundle can contain many issuance actions.

Overview 
--------

This specification enables only *transparent* issuance, since as a first step, transparency is important to properly test the applications that will be most used in the Zcash ecosystem, while enabling tracking of supply of Assets. Any user of the block chain can issue new Asset types, yet only a single issuer (a set of keys) can issue that specific Asset type, as the Asset identifiers are tied to the issuer keys.

The protocol was designed with three main properties in mind:

- At the time of issuance, the issuer can already allocate all the tokens to the corresponding owners by creating the corresponding (shielded) output notes to the respective addresses. As is implied, the issuance mechanism is itself transparent, but the allocation is totally private.
- In a single issuance bundle, the issuer can publish many issuance actions, or in other words, create multiple custom Assets.
- Every issuance action contains the ``finalize`` boolean that defines whether that specific custom Asset can have further tokens issued or not.

The issuance mechanism is broad enough for issuers to either create Assets on Zcash (i.e. Assets that originate on the Zcash block chain), as well as for institutions to create bridges from other chains and import Wrapped Assets. In fact, the protocol described below enables what we hope will be a useful set of applications. The design decision is not to have a chosen name to describe the custom Asset, but to delegate it to an off-chain mapping, as this would imply a land-grab “war”.

Issuance Keys
-------------

There are two keys relevant to the Issuer:

1. The issuance authorizing key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{isk}`, is the key that is used to sign the issuance transaction. This key is used to authorize the issuance of a specific Asset type, and is only used by the issuer. Throughout we also call this key the issuer signature key.

2. The issuance validating key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{ik}`, is the key that is used to validate the issuance transaction. This key is used to validate the issuance of a specific Asset type, and is used by all block chain users (specifically the Asset owners and consensus validators) to associate the Asset in question with the issuer. Throughout we also call this key the issuer verification key.

The two keys are derived in an analogous manner to the spend authorizing key and spend validating key, using the same signature scheme, as described in ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_ and in accordance with ZIP 316 [#zip-0316]_.

- The issuance authorizing key is derived directly from the spending key, :math:`\mathsf{sk}`, as a private signature key:

.. math:: \mathsf{isk := ToScalar^{Orchard}(︀ PRF^{expand}_{sk} ([0x0a])}

- The issuance validating key is derived from the issuance authorizing key, :math:`\mathsf{isk}`, as a public verification key:

.. math:: \mathsf{ik := SpendAuthSig^{Orchard}.DerivePublic(isk)}

This allows the issuer to use the same wallet it usually uses to transfer Assets, while keeping a disconnect from the other keys. Specifically, this method is aligned with the requirements and motivation of ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_, and can further be in  It provides further anonymity and the ability to delegate issuance of an Asset (or in the future, generate a multi-signature protocol) while the rest of the keys remain in the wallet safe.

Asset Identifier
----------------

For every new Asset, there must be a new and unique identifier of the Asset. Every Asset is defined by the Asset description, :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}`, which is a global byte string (valid across all -future- Zcash shielded protocols). From this Asset description, the specific Asset identifier, :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}`, is derived with a `GroupHash` and used within the output notes, as defined by the specific protocol (e.g. for now Orchard-style, using Pallas curve).

The main requirement for the Asset identifier is for it to be collision-free, as two different issuers MUST not be able to issue the same Asset type. One way to achieve this is to make the identifier dependent on the issuer keys, as the issuer keys are unique to each issuer. We achieve this by deriving the Asset identifier, :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` as follows:

.. math:: \mathsf{AssetId}= \mathsf{GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}}\texttt{("z.cash:Orchard-cv",} \mathsf{ik}\texttt{||}\mathsf{asset\_desc} \texttt{)}

where

- :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` is the Asset description, a UTF-8 encoded string of up to 512 bytes, which includes any information pertaining to the issuance.
- :math:`\mathsf{ik}` is the issuance validating key of the issuer, used to verify the signature on the transaction SIGHASH and is defined above.

Global Issuance State
---------------------

Issuance requires the following additions to the global state: 

- ``previously_finalized``, a set of :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` that have been finalized (i.e.: the ``finalize`` flag has been set to ``1``).

Issuance Action Description
---------------------------

An issuance action, `IssueAction`, is the instance of issuing a specific custom Asset, and contains the following fields:

- :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}`: the Asset description, a UTF-8 encoded string of up to 512 bytes
- `notes`: an array containing the unencrypted output notes of the recipients of the Asset, of type `Note`
- ``finalize``: a boolean that defines whether the issuance of that specific custom Asset is finalized or not

Once ``finalize`` is set to 1, it cannot be unset. For Assets whose ``finalize = 1``, no further tokens can be issued, so as seen below, the validators will reject the transaction. For Assets whose ``finalize = 0``, new issuance actions can be issued in future transactions. These must use the same Asset description, :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}`, and can either maintain ``finalize = 0`` or change it to ``finalize = 1``, denoting the last transaction containing issuance of such custom Asset.
  
================= =============================== ========================== ========================================================================
Size              Name                            Data Type                  Description
================= =============================== ========================== ========================================================================
Varies            :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}`    byte                       Uni-code encoded string of varied size, up to 512 bytes
Varies            nNotes                          compactSize                The number of notes in the issuance action
noteSize * nNotes vNotes                          Note[nNotes]               A sequence of note descriptions within the issuance action
1 bit             ``finalize``                    boolean                    The boolean that determines the finality of the issuance of that Asset
================= =============================== ========================== ========================================================================

We note that the output note commitment of the recipient's notes are not included in the actual transaction, but when added to the global state of the chain, they will be added to the `NoteCommitmentTree` as a shielded note. This prevents future usage of the note from being linked to the issuance transaction, as the nullifier key is not known to the validators and chain observers.

Issuance Bundle
---------------

An issuance bundle, `IssueBundle`, is the aggregate of all the issuance-related information. Specifically, contains all the issuance actions and the issuer signature on the transaction SIGHASH that validates the issuance itself. It contains the following fields:

- :math:`\mathsf{ik}`: the issuance validating key, that allows the validators to verify that the :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` is properly associated with the issuer.
- `actions`: an array of issuance actions, of type `IssueAction`.
- `authorization`: the signature of the transaction SIGHASH, signed by the issuance authorizing key, :math:`\mathsf{isk}`, that validates the issuance .

The issuance bundle is then added within the transaction format as a new bundle. This structure will be added to the v6 transaction format.

======= ==================== ========================== =========================================================================
Bytes              Name               Data Type                  Description
======= ==================== ========================== =========================================================================
Varies  nIssueActions        compactSize                The number of issuance actions in the bundle
Varies  vIssueActions        IssueAction[nIssueActions] A sequence of issuance actions descriptions
32      :math:`\mathsf{ik}`  byte[32]                   The issuance validating key of the issuer, used to validate the signature
64      authorization        byte[64]                   The signature of the transaction SIGHASH, signed by the issuer
======= ==================== ========================== =========================================================================

Issuance Protocol
-----------------
The issuer program performs the following operations

For all actions `IssueAction`:

- encode :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` as 512 byte-string
- compute :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` as :math:`GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}(ik || asset\_desc)`
- set the ``finalize`` boolean as desired (if more more issuance actions are to be created for this Asset identifier, set ``finalize = 0``, otherwise set ``finalize = 1``)
- For each recipient ``i``:

    - generate a ZSA output note as :math:`\mathsf{ note_i =(d_i, {pk_d}_i, v_i, \rho_i, \psi_i, \mathsf{AssetId}, rcm_i)}`

- encode the `IssueAction` into the vector `vIssueActions` of the bundle

For the `IssueBundle`:

- encode the `vIssueActions` vector
- encode the :math:`\mathsf{ik}` as 32 byte-string
- sign the `SIGHASH` of the transaction with the issuance authorizing key, :math:`\mathsf{isk}`, using the RedPallas signature scheme. The signature is then added to the issuance bundle.


NOTE that the commitment is not included in the `IssuanceAction` itself. As explained below, it is later computed by the validators and added to the `NoteCommitmentTree`.

Concrete Applications
---------------------

**Bridging Assets**
Issuers can wrap Assets defined in other chains and issue them at once in a single transaction. The specifics of the bridge are not implemented in the protocol, but there are several ways we conceive issuers can build these bridges (at least centralized bridges):

- First, the issuance and burn mechanism can be used in conjunction to determine the 

**Asset Features**

- By using the ``finalize`` boolean and the burning mechanism defined in [#zip-0226]_, issuers can control the supply production of any Asset associated to their issuer keys. For example,

    - by setting ``finalize = 1`` from the first issuance action for that Asset type, the issuer is in essence creating a one-time issuance transaction. This is useful when the max supply is capped from the beginning and the distribution is known in advance. All tokens are issued at once and distributed as needed.

- Issuers can also stop the existing supply production of any Asset associated to their issuer keys. This could be done by

    - issuing a last set of tokens of that specific :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}`, while at the same time setting ``finalize = 1``, or by
    - issuing a transaction with a single note in the issuance action pertaining to that :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}`, where the note will contain a ``value = 0``. This can be used for application-specific purposes (NFT collections) or for security purposes to revoke the Asset issuance (see Security and Privacy Considerations).

- Furthermore, NFT issuance is enabled by issuing in a single bundle several issuance actions, where each :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` corresponds to ``value = 1`` at the fundamental unit level. Issuers and users should make sure that ``finalize = 1`` for each of the actions in this scenario.

Consensus Rule Changes
----------------------

For the IssueBundle:

- Verify the RedPallas-based issuance authorization signature on `SIGHASH`, `authorization` is valid, based on `authorization.VerifySig(ik, SIGHASH)`

For each `IssueAction` in `IssueBundle`:

- check that :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` is a string with `0 < byte size <= 512`
- retrieve :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` from the first note in the sequence and check that :math:`\mathsf{AssetId = GroupHash^{\mathbb{P}}(ik || asset\_desc)}` is properly derived
- check that the :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` does not exist in the ``previously_finalized`` set in the global state
- check that every note in the `IssueAction` contains the same :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` and also that every note is of type `Note` and is properly constructed as :math:`note = (\mathsf{g_d, pk_d, v, \rho, \psi, AssetId})`

If all of the above checks pass, do the following:

- For each note, compute the note commitment as :math:`cm = \mathsf{NoteCommit^{OrchardZSA}_{rcm}(repr_{\mathbb{P}}(g_d), repr_{\mathbb{P}}(pk_d), v, \rho, \psi, AssetId)}` and
- add `cm` to the Merkle tree of note commitments, `NoteCommitmentTree`
- If ``finalize = 1``, add :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` to the ``previously_finalized`` set in the global state

Rationale
=========
The following is a list of rationale for different decisions made in the proposal:

- The issuance key structure was kept aligned to the original key tree in order to ease issuance integration with wallets and to prevent users from having to manage multiple keys and secrets.
- The :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` is a general byte string in order to allow for a wide range of information type to be included that may be associated with the Assets. Some are:

    - links for storage such as for NFTs.
    - metadata for Assets, encoded in any format.
    - bridging information for Wrapped Assets (chain of origin, issuer name, etc)
    - information to be committed by the issuer, though not enforceable by the protocol.

TxId Digest
===========
A new issuance transaction digest algorithm is defined that constructs the identifier for an issuance transaction. Each branch of the tree of hashes will correspond to a specific subset of transaction data. The overall structure of the hash is as follows; each name referenced here will be described in detail below::

    issuance_txid_digest
    ├── issueActions
    └── issuerVerificationKey

In the specification below, nodes of the tree are presented in depth-first order.

issuance_txid_digest
--------------------
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the following values ::

   T.1: issueActions            (field encoding bytes)
   T.2: issuerVerificationKey   (field encoding bytes)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxIdOrcZSAIssue"

T.1 issueActions
````````````````
A byte encoding of Issue Action information for all Issue Actions belonging to the transaction. For each Action, the following elements are included in the hash::

   T.1a: notes                   (field encoding bytes)
   T.1b: assetDescription        (field encoding bytes)
   T.1c: isFinalized             (1 byte)


T.1a: notes
'''''''''''
A byte encoding of Note information for all Notes belonging to the Action. For each Note, the following elements are included in the hash::

   T.1a.1: recipient                    (field encoding bytes)
   T.1a.2: value                        (field encoding bytes)
   T.1a.3: asset                        (field encoding bytes)
   T.1a.4: rho                          (field encoding bytes)
   T.1a.5: rseed                        (field encoding bytes)


T.1a.1: recipient
.................
Raw Address encoded as specified in [Zcash Protocol Spec § 5.6.4.2: Orchard Raw Payment Addresses].

T.1a.2: value
.............
Note value encoded as little-endian 8-byte representation of u64 raw value.

T.1a.3: asset
.............
Asset ID encoded as 32-byte representation of Pallas point.

T.1a.4: rho
...........
Nullifier encoded as 32-byte representation of Pallas point.

T.1a.5: rseed
.............
The ZIP 212 32-byte seed randomness for a note.

T.1b: assetDescription
''''''''''''''''''''''
UTF-8 encoding of the Asset description string.

T.1c: isFinalized
'''''''''''''''''
1-byte representation of a boolean flag that is set to 'true' if the Asset type was finalized in this action and 'false' otherwise. 'True' is represented as 1, 'false' as 0.


T.2 issuerVerificationKey
`````````````````````````
A byte encoding of issuer verification key for the bundle as defined in [Zcash Protocol Spec § 4.2.3: Orchard Key Components].


Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

**Issuer Key or AssetId Compromise**

The design of this protocol does not allow for a rotation of the issuer validating key, that would allow for replacing the key of a specific Asset (see Future Work). In case of compromise, the following actions are recommended:

- If an Asset identifier is compromised (and not the issuer verification key), the ``finalize`` boolean for that Asset should be set to `0` and a new :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` generated instead.
- If an issuer verification key is compromised, the ``finalize`` boolean for all the Assets issued with that key should be set to `0` and the issuer should change to a new spending key altogether (for the purpose of issuance), and issue new Assets, each with a new :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}`.

**Bridging Assets**
For bridging purposes, the secure method of off-boarding Assets is to burn an Asset with the burning mechanism in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. Users should be aware of issuers that demand the Assets be sent to a specific address on the Zcash chain to be redeemed elsewhere, as this may not reflect the real reserve value of the specific Wrapped Asset.

Other Considerations
====================

Implementing Zcash Nodes
------------------------

Although not enforced in the global state, it is recommended that Zcash full validators keep track of the total supply of Assets as a mutable mapping `issuanceSupplyInfoMap` from :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` to :math:`\mathsf{issuanceSupplyInfoMap := (totalSupply, finalize)}` in order to properly keep track of the total supply for different Asset types. This is useful for wallets and other applications that need to keep track of the total supply of Assets.

Fee Structures
--------------

The fee mechanism described in this ZIP will follow the mechanism described in ZIP 317b [#zip-0317b]_.

Future Work
-----------

In future versions of this ZIP, the protocol may also include a "key rotation" mechanism. This would allow an issuer to change the underlying :math:`\mathsf{ik}` of a given Asset, in case the original one was compromised, without having to change the Asset identifier altogether.

Test Vectors
============

- LINK TBD

Reference Implementation
========================

- LINK TBD
- LINK TBD

Deployment
==========

This ZIP is proposed to activate with Network Upgrade 6.

References
==========

.. [#RFC2119] `RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.html>`_
.. [#zip-0224] `ZIP 224: Orchard <zip-0224.html>`_
.. [#zip-0226] `ZIP 226: Transfer and Burn of Zcash Shielded Assets <zip-0226.html>`_
.. [#zip-0227] `ZIP 227: Issuance of Zcash Shielded Assets <zip-0227.html>`_
.. [#zip-0317b] `ZIP 317b: ZSA Extension Proportional Fee Mechanism <zip-0317b.html>`_
.. [#zip-0032] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets <zip-0032.html>`_
.. [#zip-0316] `ZIP 316: Unified Addresses and Unified Viewing Keys <zip-0316.html>`_