::

  ZIP: 32
  Title: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets
  Owners: Jack Grigg <str4d@electriccoin.co>
          Daira Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
  Credits: Pieter Wuille
           Marek Palatinus
           Pavol Rusnak
  Status: Final
  Category: Standards / Wallet
  Created: 2018-05-22
  License: MIT

:math:`% This ZIP makes heavy use of mathematical markup. If you can see this, you may want to instead view the rendered version at https://zips.z.cash/zip-0032 .`

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
[#RFC2119]_

"Jubjub" refers to the elliptic curve defined in [#protocol-jubjub]_.


Abstract
========

This proposal defines a mechanism for extending hierarchical deterministic wallets, as decribed in BIP 32
[#bip-0032]_, to support Zcash's shielded addresses.

The initial parts of the specification define (mostly) equivalent, but independent, systems for deriving a
tree of key components from a single seed, for the following shielded pools (which have different internal
key structures):

- Sapling
- Sprout (for compatibility, effectively unused)
- Orchard

The last part shows how to use these trees in the context of existing BIP 44 [#bip-0044]_ wallets.

This specification complements the existing use by some Zcash wallets of BIP 32 and BIP 44 for transparent
Zcash addresses, and is not intended to deprecate that usage (privacy risks of using transparent addresses
notwithstanding).


Motivation
==========

BIP 32 [#bip-0032]_ is the standard mechanism by which wallets for Bitcoin and its derivatives (including
Zcash's transparent addresses [#slip-0044]_) generate keys and addresses deterministically. This has several
advantages over random generation:

- Wallets only need to store a single seed (particularly useful for hardware wallets).
- A one-time backup of the seed (usually stored as a word phrase [#bip-0039]_) can be used to recover funds
  from all future addresses.
- Keys are arranged into a tree of chains, enabling wallets to represent "accounts" or other high-level
  structures.
- View authority or spend authority can be delegated independently for sub-trees without compromising the
  master seed.

At present, no such equivalent exists for Zcash's shielded addresses. This is of particular concern for
hardware wallets; all currently-marketed devices only store a seed internally, and have trained their users
to only backup that seed. Given that the Sapling upgrade will make it feasible to use hardware wallets with
shielded addresses, it is desirable to have a standard mechanism for deriving them.


Conventions
===========

Most of the notation and functions used in this ZIP are defined in the Zcash protocol specification
[#protocol]_. They are reproduced here for convenience:

- :math:`\mathsf{truncate}_k(S)` means the sequence formed from the first :math:`k` elements of :math:`S`.

- :math:`a\,||\,b` means the concatenation of sequences :math:`a` then :math:`b`.

- :math:`[k] P` means scalar multiplication of the elliptic curve point :math:`P` by the scalar :math:`k`.

- :math:`\mathsf{LEOS2IP}_\ell(S)` is the integer in range :math:`\{ 0\,.\!. 2^\ell - 1 \}` represented in
  little-endian order by the byte sequence :math:`S` of length :math:`\ell/8`.

- :math:`\mathsf{I2LEBSP}_\ell(k)` is the sequence of :math:`\ell` bits representing :math:`k` in
  little-endian order.

- :math:`\mathsf{LEBS2OSP}_\ell(B)` is defined as follows when :math:`\ell` is a multiple of :math:`8`:
  convert each group of 8 bits in :math:`B` to a byte value with the least significant bit first, and
  concatenate the resulting bytes in the same order as the groups.

- :math:`\mathsf{repr}_\mathbb{J}(P)` is the representation of the Jubjub elliptic curve point :math:`P`
  as a bit sequence, defined in [#protocol-jubjub]_.

- :math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{256}(p, x)` refers to unkeyed BLAKE2b-256 in sequential mode,
  with an output digest length of 32 bytes, 16-byte personalization string :math:`p`, and input :math:`x`.

- :math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{512}(p, x)` refers to unkeyed BLAKE2b-512 in sequential mode,
  with an output digest length of 64 bytes, 16-byte personalization string :math:`p`, and input :math:`x`.

- :math:`\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{sk}, t) :=`:math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{512}(\texttt{“Zcash_ExpandSeed”},`:math:`\mathsf{sk}\,||\,t)`

- :math:`r_\mathbb{J}` is the order of the Jubjub large prime subgroup.

- :math:`\mathsf{ToScalar}(x) :=`:math:`\mathsf{LEOS2IP}_{512}(x) \pmod{r_\mathbb{J}}`.

- :math:`\mathsf{DiversifyHash}(d)` maps a diversifier :math:`d` to a base point on the Jubjub elliptic
  curve, or to :math:`\bot` if the diversifier is invalid. It is instantiated in [#protocol-concretediversifyhash]_.

The following algorithm standardized in [#NIST-SP-800-38G]_ is used:

- :math:`\mathsf{FF1}\text{-}\mathsf{AES256.Encrypt}(key, tweak, x)` refers to the FF1 encryption algorithm
  using AES with a 256-bit :math:`key`, and parameters :math:`radix = 2,`:math:`minlen = 88,`:math:`maxlen = 88`.
  It will be used only with the empty string :math:`\texttt{“”}` as the :math:`tweak`. :math:`x` is a
  sequence of 88 bits, as is the output.

We also define the following conversion function:

- :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_\ell(k)` is the byte sequence :math:`S` of length :math:`\ell/8` representing in
  little-endian order the integer :math:`k` in range :math:`\{ 0\,.\!. 2^\ell - 1 \}`. It is the reverse
  operation of :math:`\mathsf{LEOS2IP}_\ell(S)`.

Implementors should note that this ZIP is consistently little-endian (in keeping with the Sapling and Orchard
specifications), which is the opposite of BIP 32.

We adapt the path notation of BIP 32 [#bip-0032]_ to describe shielded HD paths, using prime marks (:math:`'`) to
indicate hardened derivation (:math:`i' = i + 2^{31}`) as in BIP 44 [#bip-0044]_:

- :math:`\mathsf{CDKsk}(\mathsf{CDKsk}(\mathsf{CDKsk}(m_\mathsf{Sprout}, a'), b), c)` is written as :math:`m_\mathsf{Sprout} / a' / b / c`
- :math:`\mathsf{CDKfvk}(\mathsf{CDKfvk}(\mathsf{CDKfvk}(m_\mathsf{Sapling}, a), b), c)` is written as :math:`m_\mathsf{Sapling} / a / b / c`.


Specification: Sapling key derivation
=====================================

Sapling extended keys
---------------------

BIP 32 defines a method to derive a number of child keys from a parent key. In order to prevent these from
depending solely on the parent key itself, both the private and public keys are extended with a 32-byte chain
code. We similarly extend Sapling keys with a chain code here. However, the concepts of "private" and "public"
keys in BIP 32 do not map cleanly to Sapling's key components. We take the following approach:

- We derive child Sapling expanded spending keys, rather than Sapling spending keys. This enables us to
  implement both hardened and non-hardened derivation modes (the latter being incompatible with Sapling
  spending keys).

- We do not derive Sapling public keys directly, as this would prevent the use of diversified addresses.
  Instead, we derive Sapling full viewing keys, from which payment addresses can be generated. This maintains
  the trust semantics of BIP 32: someone with access to a BIP 32 extended public key is able to view all
  transactions involving that address, which a Sapling full viewing key also enables.

We represent a Sapling extended spending key as :math:`(\mathsf{ask, nsk, ovk, dk, c})`, where
:math:`(\mathsf{ask, nsk, ovk})` is the normal Sapling expanded spending key, :math:`\mathsf{dk}` is a
diversifier key, and :math:`\mathsf{c}` is the chain code.

We represent a Sapling extended full viewing key as :math:`(\mathsf{ak, nk, ovk, dk, c})`, where
:math:`(\mathsf{ak, nk, ovk})` is the normal Sapling full viewing key, :math:`\mathsf{dk}` is the same
diversifier key as above, and :math:`\mathsf{c}` is the chain code.

Sapling helper functions
------------------------

Define

* :math:`\mathsf{EncodeExtSKParts}(\mathsf{ask, nsk, ovk, dk}) :=`:math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{256}(\mathsf{ask})`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{256}(\mathsf{nsk})`:math:`||\,\mathsf{ovk}`:math:`||\,\mathsf{dk}`
* :math:`\mathsf{EncodeExtFVKParts}(\mathsf{ak, nk, ovk, dk}) :=`:math:`\mathsf{LEBS2OS}_{256}(\mathsf{repr}_\mathbb{J}(\mathsf{ak}))`:math:`||\,\mathsf{LEBS2OSP}_{256}(\mathsf{repr}_\mathbb{J}(\mathsf{nk}))`:math:`||\,\mathsf{ovk}`:math:`||\,\mathsf{dk}`

Sapling master key generation
-----------------------------

Let :math:`S` be a seed byte sequence of a chosen length, which MUST be at least 32 and at most 252 bytes.

- Calculate :math:`I = \mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{512}(\texttt{“ZcashIP32Sapling”}, S)`.
- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Use :math:`I_L` as the master spending key :math:`\mathsf{sk}_m`, and :math:`I_R` as the master chain code
  :math:`\mathsf{c}_m`.
- Calculate :math:`\mathsf{ask}_m`, :math:`\mathsf{nsk}_m`, and :math:`\mathsf{ovk}_m` via the standard
  Sapling derivation [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents]_:

  - :math:`\mathsf{ask}_m = \mathsf{ToScalar}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{sk}_m, [\texttt{0x00}]))`
  - :math:`\mathsf{nsk}_m = \mathsf{ToScalar}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{sk}_m, [\texttt{0x01}]))`
  - :math:`\mathsf{ovk}_m = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{sk}_m, [\texttt{0x02}]))`.

- Calculate :math:`\mathsf{dk}_m` similarly:

  - :math:`\mathsf{dk}_m = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{sk}_m, [\texttt{0x10}]))`.

- Return :math:`(\mathsf{ask}_m, \mathsf{nsk}_m, \mathsf{ovk}_m, \mathsf{dk}_m, \mathsf{c}_m)` as the
  master extended spending key :math:`m_\mathsf{Sapling}`.

Sapling child key derivation
----------------------------

As in BIP 32, the method for deriving a child extended key, given a parent extended key and an index :math:`i`,
depends on the type of key being derived, and whether this is a hardened or non-hardened derivation.

Deriving a child extended spending key
``````````````````````````````````````

:math:`\mathsf{CDKsk}((\mathsf{ask}_{par}, \mathsf{nsk}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par}, \mathsf{dk}_{par}, \mathsf{c}_{par}), i)`:math:`\rightarrow (\mathsf{ask}_i, \mathsf{nsk}_i, \mathsf{ovk}_i, \mathsf{dk}_i, \mathsf{c}_i)`

- Check whether :math:`i \geq 2^{31}` (whether the child is a hardened key).

  - If so (hardened child):
    let :math:`I = \mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{c}_{par}, [\texttt{0x11}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeExtSKParts}(\mathsf{ask}_{par}, \mathsf{nsk}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par}, \mathsf{dk}_{par})`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i))`.
  - If not (normal child):
    let :math:`I = \mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{c}_{par}, [\texttt{0x12}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeExtFVKParts}(\mathsf{ak}_{par}, \mathsf{nk}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par}, \mathsf{dk}_{par})`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i))`
    where :math:`(\mathsf{nk}_{par}, \mathsf{ak}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par})` is the full viewing key derived from
    :math:`(\mathsf{ask}_{par}, \mathsf{nsk}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par})` as described in [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents]_.

- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Let :math:`I_\mathsf{ask} = \mathsf{ToScalar}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x13}]))`.
- Let :math:`I_\mathsf{nsk} = \mathsf{ToScalar}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x14}]))`.
- Return:

  - :math:`\mathsf{ask}_i = (I_\mathsf{ask} + \mathsf{ask}_{par}) \pmod{r_\mathbb{J}}`
  - :math:`\mathsf{nsk}_i = (I_\mathsf{nsk} + \mathsf{nsk}_{par}) \pmod{r_\mathbb{J}}`
  - :math:`\mathsf{ovk}_i = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x15}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{ovk}_{par}))`
  - :math:`\mathsf{dk}_i  = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x16}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{dk}_{par}))`
  - :math:`\mathsf{c}_i   = I_R`.

Deriving a child extended full viewing key
``````````````````````````````````````````

Let :math:`\mathcal{G}` be as defined in [#protocol-concretespendauthsig]_ and let :math:`\mathcal{H}` be as defined
in [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents]_.

:math:`\mathsf{CDKfvk}((\mathsf{ak}_{par}, \mathsf{nk}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par}, \mathsf{dk}_{par}, \mathsf{c}_{par}), i)`:math:`\rightarrow (\mathsf{ak}_{i}, \mathsf{nk}_{i}, \mathsf{ovk}_{i}, \mathsf{dk}_{i}, \mathsf{c}_{i})`

- Check whether :math:`i \geq 2^{31}` (whether the child is a hardened key).

  - If so (hardened child): return failure.
  - If not (normal child):  let
    :math:`I = \mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{c}_{par}, [\texttt{0x12}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeExtFVKParts}(\mathsf{ak}_{par}, \mathsf{nk}_{par}, \mathsf{ovk}_{par}, \mathsf{dk}_{par})`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i))`.

- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Let :math:`I_\mathsf{ask} = \mathsf{ToScalar}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x13}]))`.
- Let :math:`I_\mathsf{nsk} = \mathsf{ToScalar}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x14}]))`.
- Return:

  - :math:`\mathsf{ak}_i  = [I_\mathsf{ask}]\,\mathcal{G} + \mathsf{ak}_{par}`
  - :math:`\mathsf{nk}_i  = [I_\mathsf{nsk}]\,\mathcal{H} + \mathsf{nk}_{par}`
  - :math:`\mathsf{ovk}_i = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x15}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{ovk}_{par}))`
  - :math:`\mathsf{dk}_i  = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(I_L, [\texttt{0x16}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{dk}_{par}))`
  - :math:`\mathsf{c}_i   = I_R`.

Sapling diversifier derivation
------------------------------

The 88-bit diversifiers for a Sapling extended key are derived from its diversifier key :math:`\mathsf{dk}`.
To prevent the diversifier leaking how many diversified addresses have already been generated for an account,
we make the sequence of diversifiers pseudorandom and uncorrelated to that of any other account. In order to
reach the maximum possible diversifier range without running into repetitions due to the birthday bound, we
use FF1-AES256 as a Pseudo-Random Permutation as follows:

- Let :math:`j` be the index of the desired diversifier, in the range :math:`0\,.\!. 2^{88} - 1`.
- :math:`d_j = \mathsf{FF1}\text{-}\mathsf{AES256.Encrypt}(\mathsf{dk}, \texttt{“”}, \mathsf{I2LEBSP}_{88}(j))`.

A valid diversifier :math:`d_j` is one for which :math:`\mathsf{DiversifyHash}(d_j) \neq \bot`.
For a given :math:`\mathsf{dk}`, approximately half of the possible values of :math:`j` yield valid
diversifiers.

The default diversifier for a Sapling extended key is defined to be :math:`d_j`, where :math:`j` is the
least nonnegative integer yielding a valid diversifier.


Specification: Sprout key derivation
====================================

For completeness, we define a system for deriving a tree of Sprout key components. It is unlikely that this
will garner much usage once Sapling activates, but is presented for those users who may require it.

Sprout extended keys
--------------------

Due to the way Sprout keys are constructed and used, it is not possible to derive incoming viewing keys or
payment addresses in parallel with spending keys. Nor is it possible to implement non-hardened derivation.
We therefore only define and derive Sprout extended spending keys.

We represent a Sprout extended spending key as :math:`(\mathsf{a_{sk}, c})`, where :math:`\mathsf{a_{sk}}`
is the normal Sprout spending key, and :math:`\mathsf{c}` is the chain code.

Sprout helper functions
-----------------------

Let :math:`\mathsf{EncodeASK}(\mathsf{a_{sk}})` be the 32-byte encoding of :math:`\mathsf{a_{sk}}` in the
raw encoding of a Sprout spending key (excluding lead bytes) as specified in [#protocol-sproutspendingkeyencoding]_.

Let :math:`\mathsf{DecodeASK}(ASK)` be the result of clearing the 4 most significant bits of the first byte
of :math:`ASK`, and decoding the 32-byte result according to the inverse of :math:`\mathsf{EncodeASK}`.

Sprout master key generation
----------------------------

Let :math:`S` be a seed byte sequence of a chosen length, which MUST be at least 32 and at most 252 bytes.

- Calculate :math:`I = \mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{512}(\texttt{“ZcashIP32_Sprout”}, S)`.
- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Use :math:`\mathsf{DecodeASK}(I_L)` as the master spending key :math:`\mathsf{a}_{\mathsf{sk},m}`.
- Use :math:`I_R` as the master chain code :math:`\mathsf{c}_m`.

Sprout child key derivation
---------------------------

:math:`\mathsf{CDKsk}((\mathsf{a}_{\mathsf{sk},par}, \mathsf{c}_{par}), i)`:math:`\rightarrow (\mathsf{a}_{\mathsf{sk},i}, \mathsf{c}_i)`

- Check whether :math:`i \geq 2^{31}` (whether the child is a hardened key).

  - If so (hardened child): let
    :math:`I = \mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{c}_{par}, [\texttt{0x80}]`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeASK}(\mathsf{a}_{\mathsf{sk},par})`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i))`.
  - If not (normal child): return failure.

- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Use :math:`\mathsf{DecodeASK}(I_L)` as the child spending key :math:`\mathsf{a}_{\mathsf{sk},i}`.
- Use :math:`I_R` as the child chain code :math:`\mathsf{c}_i`.


Specification: Orchard key derivation
=====================================

The derivation mechanism for Sapling addresses specified above incurs significant complexity to support
non-hardened derivation. In the several years since Sapling was deployed, we have seen no use cases for
non-hardened derivation appear. With that in mind, we define Orchard key derivation very similarly to
Sprout above: only hardened derivation is supported.

Orchard extended keys
---------------------

We represent an Orchard extended spending key as :math:`(\mathsf{sk, c}),` where :math:`\mathsf{sk}`
is the normal Orchard spending key (opaque 32 bytes), and :math:`\mathsf{c}` is the chain code.

Orchard master key generation
-----------------------------

Let :math:`S` be a seed byte sequence of a chosen length, which MUST be at least 32 and at most 252 bytes.

- Calculate :math:`I = \mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{512}(\texttt{“ZcashIP32Orchard”}, S)`.
- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Use :math:`I_L` as the master spending key :math:`\mathsf{sk}_m`.
- Use :math:`I_R` as the master chain code :math:`\mathsf{c}_m`.

Orchard child key derivation
----------------------------

:math:`\mathsf{CDKsk}((\mathsf{sk}_{par}, \mathsf{c}_{par}), i)`:math:`\rightarrow (\mathsf{sk}_{i}, \mathsf{c}_i)`

- Check whether :math:`i \geq 2^{31}` (whether the child is a hardened key).

  - If so (hardened child): let
    :math:`I = \mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{c}_{par}, [\texttt{0x81}]\,||\,\mathsf{sk}_{par}\,||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i))`.
  - If not (normal child): return failure.

- Split :math:`I` into two 32-byte sequences, :math:`I_L` and :math:`I_R`.
- Use :math:`I_L` as the child spending key :math:`\mathsf{sk}_{i}`.
- Use :math:`I_R` as the child chain code :math:`\mathsf{c}_i`.

Orchard diversifier derivation
------------------------------

As with Sapling, we define a mechanism for deterministically deriving a sequence of diversifiers, without
leaking how many diversified addresses have already been generated for an account. Unlike Sapling, we do so
by deriving a diversifier key directly from the full viewing key, instead of as part of the extended spending
key. This means that the full viewing key provides the capability to determine the position of a diversifier
within the sequence, which matches the capabilities of a Sapling extended full viewing key but simplifies the
key structure.

Given an Orchard extended spending key :math:`(\mathsf{sk}_i, \mathsf{c}_i)`:

- Let :math:`\mathsf{fvk}_i` be the raw encoding of the Orchard full viewing key for :math:`\mathsf{sk}_i`
  (as specified in TODO).
- :math:`\mathsf{dk}_i = \mathsf{truncate}_{32}(\mathsf{PRF^{expand}}(\mathsf{fvk}_i, [\texttt{0x82}]))`.
- Let :math:`j` be the index of the desired diversifier, in the range :math:`0\,.\!. 2^{88} - 1`.
- :math:`d_{i,j} = \mathsf{FF1}\text{-}\mathsf{AES256.Encrypt}(\mathsf{dk}_i, \texttt{“”}, \mathsf{I2LEBSP}_{88}(j))`.

Note that unlike Sapling, all Orchard diversifiers are valid, and thus all possible values of :math:`j` yield
valid diversifiers.

The default diversifier for :math:`(\mathsf{sk}_i, \mathsf{c}_i)` is defined to be :math:`d_{i,0}.`


Specification: Wallet usage
===========================

Existing Zcash-supporting HD wallets all use BIP 44 [#bip-0044]_ to organize their derived keys. In order to
more easily mesh with existing user experiences, we broadly follow BIP 44's design here. However, we have
altered the design where it makes sense to leverage features of shielded addresses.

Key path levels
---------------

Sprout, Sapling, and Orchard key paths have the following three path levels at the top, all of which use
hardened derivation:

- :math:`purpose`: a constant set to :math:`32'` (or :math:`\texttt{0x80000020}`) following the BIP 43
  recommendation. It indicates that the subtree of this node is used according to this specification.

- :math:`coin\_type`: a constant identifying the cybercoin that this subtree's keys are used with. For
  compatibility with existing BIP 44 implementations, we use the same constants as defined in SLIP 44
  [#slip-0044]_. Note that in keeping with that document, all cybercoin testnets share :math:`coin\_type`
  index :math:`1`.

- :math:`account`: numbered from index :math:`0` in sequentially increasing manner. Defined as in
  BIP 44 [#bip-0044]_.

Unlike BIP 44, none of the shielded key paths have a :math:`change` path level. The use of change addresses
in Bitcoin is a (failed) attempt to increase the difficulty of tracking users on the transaction graph, by
segregating external and internal address usage. Shielded addresses are never publicly visible in
transactions, which means that sending change back to the originating address is indistinguishable from
using a change address.

Sapling key path
----------------

Sapling provides a mechanism to allow the efficient creation of diversified payment addresses with the same
spending authority. A group of such addresses shares the same full viewing key and incoming viewing key, and
so creating as many unlinkable addresses as needed does not increase the cost of scanning the block chain for
relevant transactions.

The above key path levels include an account identifier, which in all user interfaces is represented as a
"bucket of funds" under the control of a single spending authority. Therefore, wallets implementing Sapling
ZIP 32 derivation MUST support the following path for any account in range :math:`\{ 0\,.\!. 2^{31} - 1 \}`:

* :math:`m_\mathsf{Sapling} / purpose' / coin\_type' / account'`.

Furthermore, wallets MUST support generating the default payment address (corresponding to the default
diversifier as defined above) for any account they support. They MAY also support generating a stream of
payment addresses for a given account, if they wish to maintain the user experience of giving a unique
address to each recipient.

Note that a given account can have a maximum of approximately :math:`2^{87}` payment addresses, because each
diversifier has around a 50% chance of being invalid.

If in certain circumstances a wallet needs to derive independent spend authorities within a single account,
they MAY additionally support a non-hardened :math:`address\_index` path level as in [#bip-0044]_:

* :math:`m_\mathsf{Sapling} / purpose' / coin\_type' / account' / address\_index`.

Sprout key path
---------------

Wallets implementing Sprout ZIP 32 derivation MUST support the following path:

* :math:`m_\mathsf{Sprout} / purpose' / coin\_type' / account' / address\_index`.

Orchard key path
----------------

Orchard supports diversified addresses with the same spending authority (like Sapling). A group of such
addresses shares the same full viewing key and incoming viewing key, and so creating as many unlinkable
addresses as needed does not increase the cost of scanning the block chain for relevant transactions.

The above key path levels include an account identifier, which in all user interfaces is represented as a
"bucket of funds" under the control of a single spending authority. Therefore, wallets implementing Orchard
ZIP 32 derivation MUST support the following path for any account in range :math:`\{ 0\,.\!. 2^{31} - 1 \}`:

* :math:`m_\mathsf{Orchard} / purpose' / coin\_type' / account'`.

Furthermore, wallets MUST support generating the default payment address (corresponding to the default
diversifier for Orchard) for any account they support. They MAY also support generating a stream of payment
addresses for a given account, if they wish to maintain the user experience of giving a unique address to
each recipient.

Note that a given account can have a maximum of :math:`2^{88}` payment addresses (unlike Sapling, all Orchard
diversifiers are valid).


Specification: Fingerprints and Tags
====================================

Sapling Full Viewing Key Fingerprints and Tags
----------------------------------------------

A "Sapling full viewing key fingerprint" of a full viewing key with raw encoding :math:`FVK` (as specified
in [#protocol-saplingfullviewingkeyencoding]_) is given by:

* :math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{256}(\texttt{“ZcashSaplingFVFP”}, FVK)`.

It MAY be used to uniquely identify a particular Sapling full viewing key.

A "Sapling full viewing key tag" is the first 4 bytes of the corresponding Sapling full viewing key
fingerprint. It is intended for optimizing performance of key lookups, and MUST NOT be assumed to
uniquely identify a particular key.

Sprout Address Fingerprints and Tags
------------------------------------

A "Sprout address fingerprint" of a Sprout payment address with raw encoding :math:`ADDR` (as specified in
[#protocol-sproutpaymentaddrencoding]_, including the lead bytes) is given by:

* :math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{256}(\texttt{“Zcash_Sprout_AFP”}, ADDR)`.

It MAY be used to uniquely identify a particular Sprout payment address.

A "Sprout address tag" is the first 4 bytes of the corresponding Sprout address fingerprint. It is
intended for optimizing performance of address lookups, and MUST NOT be assumed to uniquely identify
a particular address.

Orchard Full Viewing Key Fingerprints and Tags
----------------------------------------------

An "Orchard full viewing key fingerprint" of a full viewing key with raw encoding :math:`FVK` (as specified
in TODO) is given by:

* :math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{256}(\texttt{“ZcashOrchardFVFP”}, FVK)`.

It MAY be used to uniquely identify a particular Orchard full viewing key.

An "Orchard full viewing key tag" is the first 4 bytes of the corresponding Orchard full viewing key
fingerprint. It is intended for optimizing performance of key lookups, and MUST NOT be assumed to
uniquely identify a particular key.

Seed Fingerprints
-----------------

A "seed fingerprint" for the master seed :math:`S` of a hierarchical deterministic wallet is given by:

* :math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b}\text{-}\mathsf{256}(\texttt{“Zcash_HD_Seed_FP”},`:math:`[\mathsf{length}(S)]\,||\,S)`.

It MAY be used to uniquely identify a particular hierarchical deterministic wallet.

No corresponding short tag is defined.

Note: a previous version of this specification did not have the length byte prefixing the seed.
The current specification reflects the implementation in `zcashd`.


Specification: Key Encodings
============================

The following encodings are analogous to the ``xprv`` and ``xpub`` encodings defined
in BIP 32 for transparent keys and addresses. Each key type has a raw representation
and a Bech32 [#bip-0173]_ encoding.


Sapling extended spending keys
------------------------------

A Sapling extended spending key :math:`(\mathsf{ask, nsk, ovk, dk, c})`, at depth :math:`depth`,
with parent full viewing key tag :math:`parent\_fvk\_tag` and child number :math:`i`, is
represented as a byte sequence:

* :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{8}(depth)`:math:`||\,parent\_fvk\_tag`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i)`:math:`||\,\mathsf{c}`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeExtSKParts}(\mathsf{ask, nsk, ovk, dk})`.

For the master extended spending key, :math:`depth` is :math:`0`, :math:`parent\_fvk\_tag` is
4 zero bytes, and :math:`i` is :math:`0`.

When encoded as Bech32, the Human-Readable Part is ``secret-extended-key-main``
for the production network, or ``secret-extended-key-test`` for the test network.

Sapling extended full viewing keys
----------------------------------

A Sapling extended full viewing key :math:`(\mathsf{ak, nk, ovk, dk, c})`, at depth :math:`depth`,
with parent full viewing key tag :math:`parent\_fvk\_tag` and child number :math:`i`, is
represented as a byte sequence:

* :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{8}(depth)`:math:`||\,parent\_fvk\_tag`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i)`:math:`||\,\mathsf{c}`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeExtFVKParts}(\mathsf{ak, nk, ovk, dk})`.

For the master extended full viewing key, :math:`depth` is :math:`0`, :math:`parent\_fvk\_tag`
is 4 zero bytes, and :math:`i` is :math:`0`.

When encoded as Bech32, the Human-Readable Part is ``zxviews`` for the production
network, or ``zxviewtestsapling`` for the test network.

Sprout extended spending keys
-----------------------------

A Sprout extended spending key :math:`(\mathsf{a_{sk}, c})`, at depth :math:`depth`, with
parent address tag :math:`parent\_addr\_tag` and child number :math:`i`, is represented as a
byte sequence:

* :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{8}(depth)`:math:`||\,parent\_addr\_tag`:math:`||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i)`:math:`||\,\mathsf{c}`:math:`||\,\mathsf{EncodeASK}(\mathsf{a_{sk}})`.

For the master extended spending key, :math:`depth` is :math:`0`, :math:`parent\_addr\_tag`
is 4 zero bytes, and :math:`i` is :math:`0`.

When encoded as Bech32, the Human-Readable Part is ``zxsprout`` for the production
network, or ``zxtestsprout`` for the test network. Sprout extended spending keys
are encoded using Bech32 even though other Sprout keys and addresses are encoded
using Base58Check.

Orchard extended spending keys
------------------------------

An Orchard extended spending key :math:`(\mathsf{sk, c})`, at depth :math:`depth`, with parent full viewing
key tag :math:`parent\_fvk\_tag` and child number :math:`i`, is represented as a byte sequence:

* :math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{8}(depth)\,||\,parent\_fvk\_tag\,||\,\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{32}(i)\,||\,\mathsf{c}\,||\,\mathsf{sk}`.

For the master extended spending key, :math:`depth` is :math:`0`, :math:`parent\_fvk\_tag` is
4 zero bytes, and :math:`i` is :math:`0`.

When encoded as Bech32, the Human-Readable Part is ``secret-orchard-extsk-main``
for the production network, or ``secret-orchard-extsk-test`` for the test network.

We define this encoding for completeness, however given that it includes the capability to derive child
spending keys, we expect that most wallets will only expose the regular Orchard spending key encoding to
users (TODO: reference).


Test Vectors
============

TBC


Reference Implementation
========================

* https://github.com/zcash-hackworks/zip32
* https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/pull/29
* https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/3447
* https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/3492


References
==========

.. [#RFC2119] `RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html>`_
.. [#bip-0032] `BIP 32: Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki>`_
.. [#bip-0039] `BIP 39: Mnemonic code for generating deterministic keys <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki>`_
.. [#bip-0043] `BIP 43: Purpose Field for Deterministic Wallets <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0043.mediawiki>`_
.. [#bip-0044] `BIP 44: Multi-Account Hierarchy for Deterministic Wallets <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki>`_
.. [#slip-0044] `SLIP 44: Registered coin types for BIP-0044 <https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md>`_
.. [#bip-0173] `BIP 173: Base32 address format for native v0-16 witness outputs <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15 or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 4.2.2: Sapling Key Components <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingkeycomponents>`_
.. [#protocol-concretediversifyhash] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 5.4.1.6: DiversifyHash Hash Function <protocol/protocol.pdf#concretediversifyhash>`_
.. [#protocol-concretespendauthsig] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 5.4.6.1: Spend Authorization Signature <protocol/protocol.pdf#concretespendauthsig>`_
.. [#protocol-jubjub] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 5.4.8.3: Jubjub <protocol/protocol.pdf#jubjub>`_
.. [#protocol-sproutpaymentaddrencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 5.6.3: Sprout Shielded Payment Addresses <protocol/protocol.pdf#sproutpaymentaddrencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingfullviewingkeyencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 5.6.7: Sapling Full Viewing Keys <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingfullviewingkeyencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-sproutspendingkeyencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 5.6.8: Sprout Spending Keys <protocol/protocol.pdf#sproutspendingkeyencoding>`_
.. [#NIST-SP-800-38G] `NIST Special Publication 800-38G — Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Methods for Format-Preserving Encryption <https://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-38G>`_
