::

  ZIP: 205
  Title: Deployment of the Sapling Network Upgrade
  Owners: Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira-emma@electriccoin.co>
  Credits: Simon Liu
  Status: Final
  Category: Consensus / Network
  Created: 2018-10-08
  License: MIT


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST" and "SHOULD" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they appear in all capitals.

The terms "consensus branch" and "network upgrade" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [#zip-0200]_

The terms "Testnet" and "Mainnet" are to be interpreted as described in
section 3.12 of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-networks]_.

The terms below are to be interpreted as follows:

Sapling
  Code-name for the second Zcash network upgrade, also known as Network Upgrade 1.


Abstract
========

This proposal defines the deployment of the Sapling network upgrade. In addition, 
it describes a hard fork that occurred on Testnet to allow "minimum-difficulty"
blocks.


Specification
=============

Sapling deployment
------------------

The primary sources of information about Sapling consensus protocol changes are:

- The Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol]_.
- Transaction Signature Validation for Sapling [#zip-0243]_.
- Network Upgrade Mechanism [#zip-0200]_.

The network handshake and peer management mechanisms defined in [#zip-0201]_ also 
apply to this upgrade.


The following network upgrade constants [#zip-0200]_ are defined for the Sapling 
upgrade:

CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID
  ``0x76b809bb``

ACTIVATION_HEIGHT (Sapling)
  Testnet: 280000

  Mainnet: 419200


On Testnet, Sapling had activated prior to this height, but that consensus branch
was rolled back. A subsequent hard fork occurred on Testnet, changing the
difficulty algorithm to accept "minimum-difficulty" blocks under certain
conditions starting at block height 299188.

On both Mainnet and Testnet, Sapling-compatible nodes MUST advertise protocol
version 170007 or later. The minimum peer protocol version that Sapling-compatible
nodes will connect to, remains 170002.

Pre-Sapling nodes are defined as nodes advertising a protocol version less than 
170007.

Approximately three days (defined in terms of block height) before the Sapling 
activation height, Sapling-compatible nodes will change the behaviour of their peer 
connection logic in order to prefer pre-Sapling peers for eviction from the set of 
peer connections.

::

    /** The period before a network upgrade activates, where connections to upgrading peers are preferred (in blocks). */
    static const int NETWORK_UPGRADE_PEER_PREFERENCE_BLOCK_PERIOD = 24 * 24 * 3;

The implementation is similar to that for Overwinter which was described in
[#zip-0201]_.

Once Sapling activates on Testnet or Mainnet, Sapling nodes SHOULD take steps to:

- reject new connections from pre-Sapling nodes;
- disconnect any existing connections to pre-Sapling nodes.


Change to difficulty adjustment on Testnet
------------------------------------------

Section 7.6.3 of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-diffadjustment]_
describes the algorithm used to adjust the difficulty of a block (defined in terms
of a "target threshold") based on the ``nTime`` and ``nBits`` fields of preceding
blocks.

This algorithm changed on Testnet, starting from block 299188, to allow
"minimum-difficulty" blocks. If the block time of a block from this height onward 
is greater than 15 minutes after that of the preceding block, then the block is a
minimum-difficulty block. In that case its ``nBits`` field MUST be set to
ToCompact(PoWLimit), where PoWLimit is the value defined for Testnet in section 5.3
of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-constants]_, and ToCompact is as
defined in section 7.7.4 of that specification [#protocol-nbits]_.

Note: a previous revision of this ZIP incorrectly said that only the target
threshold of minimum-difficulty blocks is affected. In fact the ``nBits`` field
is modified as well, and this affects difficulty adjustment for subsequent blocks.

This change does not affect Mainnet.


Backward compatibility
======================

Prior to the network upgrade activating, Sapling and pre-Sapling nodes are
compatible and can connect to each other. However, Sapling nodes will have a
preference for connecting to other Sapling nodes, so pre-Sapling nodes will
gradually be disconnected in the run up to activation.

Once the network upgrades, even though pre-Sapling nodes can still accept the
numerically larger protocol version used by Sapling as being valid, Sapling nodes
will always disconnect peers using lower protocol versions.


Support in zcashd
=================

Support for Sapling consensus rules was implemented in zcashd version 2.0.0.
The majority of support for RPC calls and persistence of Sapling z-addresses
was implemented in version 2.0.1. Both of these versions advertise protocol
version 170007.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.2.16 or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-networks] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.2.16. Section 3.12: Mainnet and Testnet <protocol/protocol.pdf#networks>`_
.. [#protocol-constants] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.2.16. Section 5.3: Constants <protocol/protocol.pdf#constants>`_
.. [#protocol-diffadjustment] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.2.16. Section 7.7.3: Difficulty adjustment <protocol/protocol.pdf#diffadjustment>`_
.. [#protocol-nbits] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.2.16. Section 7.7.4: nBits conversion <protocol/protocol.pdf#nbits>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0201] `ZIP 201: Network Peer Management for Overwinter <zip-0201.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0243] `ZIP 243: Transaction Signature Validation for Sapling <zip-0243.rst>`_
