::

  ZIP: 200
  Title: Network Upgrade Mechanism
  Owners: Jack Grigg <str4d@electriccoin.co>
  Status: Final
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2018-01-08
  License: MIT


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they appear in all capitals.

The terms below are to be interpreted as follows:

Block chain
  A sequence of blocks starting at the genesis block, where the header of each block refers to the previous
  block in the sequence.

Consensus rule set
  A set of validation rules that determine which block chains are considered valid.

Consensus rule change
  A change in the consensus rule set of the network, such that nodes that do not recognize the new rules will
  follow a different block chain.

Consensus branch
  A block chain with a common consensus rule set, where the first block in the chain is either the genesis
  block, or the child of a parent block created under an older set of consensus rules (i.e. the parent block
  is a member of a different consensus branch). By definition, every block belongs to at most one consensus
  branch.

Network upgrade
  An intentional consensus rule change undertaken by the community in order to improve the network.


Abstract
========

This proposal defines a mechanism for coordinating upgrades of the Zcash network, in order to remove ambiguity
about when network upgrades will activate, provide defined periods in which users should upgrade their local
software, and minimize the risks to both the upgrading network and any users opting out of the changes.


Motivation
==========

Zcash is a *consensual currency*: nobody is ever going to force someone to use a specific software
implementation or a specific consensus branch of Zcash. [#consensual-currency]_ As such, different
sub-communities will always have the freedom to choose different variants or branches which offer different
design trade-offs.

The current Zcash software includes an *End-of-Service halt* feature, causing nodes running a particular version
to automatically shut down approximately 16 weeks after that version was released (specifically, at the block
height ``DEPRECATION_HEIGHT`` defined in the source code for that version). This was implemented for several
reasons: [#release-lifecycle]_

- It gives the same systemic advantage of removing old software as auto-upgrade behavior.

- It requires users to individually choose one of the following options:

  - Upgrade to a more recent software release from the main network.

  - Upgrade to an alternative release.

  - Modify their node in order to keep running the older software.

Developers can rely on this cadence for coordinating network upgrades. Once the last pre-upgrade software
version has been deprecated, they can reasonably assume that all node operators on the network either support
the upgraded rules, or have explicitly chosen not to follow them.

However, this behaviour is not sufficient for performing network upgrades. A globally-understood on-chain
activation mechanism is necessary so that nodes can unambiguously know at what point the changes from an
upgrade come into effect (and can enforce consensus rule changes, for example).


Specification
=============

The following constants are defined for every network upgrade:

CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID
  A globally-unique non-zero 32-bit identifier.

  Implementations MAY use a value of zero in consensus branch ID fields to indicate the absence of any
  upgrade (i.e. that the Sprout consensus rules apply).

ACTIVATION_HEIGHT
  The non-zero block height at which the network upgrade rules will come into effect, and be enforced as part
  of the block chain consensus.

  For removal of ambiguity, the block at height ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT - 1`` is subject to the pre-upgrade
  consensus rules, and would be the last common block in the event of a persistent pre-upgrade consensus
  branch.

  It MUST be greater than the value of ``DEPRECATION_HEIGHT`` in the last software version that will not
  contain support for the network upgrade. It SHOULD be chosen to be reached approximately three months after
  the first software version containing support for the network upgrade is released, for the following reason:

  - As of the time of writing (the 1.0.15 release), the release cycle is six weeks long, and nodes undergo
    End-of-Service halt 16 weeks after release. Thus, if version ``X`` contains support for a network upgrade,
    version ``X-1`` will be deprecated 10 weeks after the release of version ``X``, which is about 2.3 months.
    A three-month window provides ample time for users to upgrade their nodes after End-of-Service halt, and
    re-integrate into the network prior to activation of the network upgrade.

The relationship between ``CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID`` and ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT`` is many-to-one: it is possible
for many distinct consensus branches to descend from the same parent block (and thus have the same
``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT``), but a specific consensus branch can only have one parent block. Concretely, this
means that if the ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT`` of a network upgrade is changed for any reason (e.g. security
vulnerabilities or consensus bugs are discovered), the ``CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID`` MUST also be changed.

Activation mechanism
--------------------

The Zcash block chain is broken into "epochs" of block height intervals
``[ACTIVATION_HEIGHT_N, ACTIVATION_HEIGHT_{N+1})`` (i.e. including ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT_N`` and excluding
``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT_{N+1}``), on which consensus rule sets are defined.

When a consensus rule depends on activation of a particular upgrade, its implementation (and that of any
network behavior or surrounding code that depends on it) MUST be gated by a block height check. For example:

.. code:: cpp

  if (CurrentEpoch(chainActive.Height(), Params().GetConsensus()) == Consensus::UPGRADE_OVERWINTER) {
      // Overwinter-specific logic
  } else {
      // Non-Overwinter logic
  }

  // ...

  if (NetworkUpgradeActive(pindex->nHeight, Params().GetConsensus(), Consensus::UPGRADE_OVERWINTER)) {
      // Overwinter consensus rules applied to block
  } else {
      // Pre-Overwinter consensus rules applied to block
  }


Block validation
````````````````
Incoming blocks known to have a particular height (due to their parent chain being entirely known) MUST be
validated under the consensus rules corresponding to the expected consensus branch ID for that height.

Incoming blocks with unknown heights (because at least one block header in their parent chain is unknown)
MAY be cached, so that they can be reconsidered in the future after all their parents have been received.

Chain reorganization
````````````````````
It is possible for a reorganization to occur that rolls back from after the activation height, to before that
height. This can be handled in the same way as any regular chain orphaning or reorganization, as long as the
new chain is valid.

Post-activation upgrading
`````````````````````````
If a user does not upgrade their node to a compatible software version before ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT`` is
reached, and the node continues running (which could normally only occur if the End-of-Service halt were
bypassed), then the node will follow any pre-upgrade consensus branch that persists. In this case it may
download blocks that are incompatible with the post-upgrade consensus branch. If the user subsequently
upgrades their node to a compatible software version, the node will consider these blocks to be invalid,
and if there are a significant number of invalid blocks it SHOULD shut down and alert the user of the issue.

Memory pool
-----------

While the current chain tip height is below ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT``, nodes SHOULD NOT accept transactions that
will only be valid on the post-upgrade consensus branch.

When the current chain tip height reaches ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT``, the node's local transaction memory pool
SHOULD be cleared of transactions that will never be valid on the post-upgrade consensus branch.

Two-way replay protection
-------------------------

Before the Overwinter network upgrade, two-way replay protection is ensured by enforcing post-upgrade that the
most significant bit of the transaction version is set to 1. [#zip-0202]_ From the perspective of old nodes,
the transactions will have a negative version number, which is invalid under the old consensus rules.
Enforcing this rule trivially makes old transactions invalid on the Overwinter consensus branch.

After the Overwinter network upgrade, two-way replay protection is ensured by transaction signatures
committing to a specific ``CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID``. [#zip-0143]_

Wipe-out protection
-------------------

Nodes running upgrade-aware software versions will enforce the upgraded consensus rules from
``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT``. The chain from that height will not reorganize to a pre-upgrade consensus branch if
any block in that consensus branch would violate the new consensus rules.

Care must be taken, however, to account for possible edge cases where the old and new consensus rules do not
differ. For example, if the non-upgraded chain only contained empty blocks from ``ACTIVATION_HEIGHT``, and the
coinbase transactions were valid under both the old and new consensus rules, a wipe-out could occur. The
Overwinter network upgrade is not susceptible to this because all previous transaction versions will become
invalid, meaning that the coinbase transactions must use the newer transaction version. More generally, this
issue could be addressed in a future network upgrade by modifying the block header to include a commitment to
the ``CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID``.


Deployment
==========

This proposal will be deployed with the Overwinter network upgrade. [#zip-0201]_


Backward compatibility
======================

This proposal intentionally creates what is known as a "bilateral consensus rule change". Use of this
mechanism requires that all network participants upgrade their software to a compatible version within the
upgrade window. Older software will treat post-upgrade blocks as invalid, and will follow any pre-upgrade
consensus branch that persists.


Reference Implementation
========================

https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/2898


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#consensual-currency] `Consensual Currency. Electric Coin Company blog <https://electriccoin.co/blog/consensual-currency/>`_
.. [#release-lifecycle]
   - `Release Cycle and Lifetimes. Electric Coin Company blog <https://electriccoin.co/blog/release-cycle-and-lifetimes/>`_
   - `Release Cycle Update. Electric Coin Company blog <https://electriccoin.co/blog/release-cycle-update/>`_
.. [#zip-0143] `ZIP 143: Transaction Signature Validation for Overwinter <zip-0143.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0201] `ZIP 201: Network Peer Management for Overwinter <zip-0201.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0202] `ZIP 202: Version 3 Transaction Format for Overwinter <zip-0202.rst>`_
