::

  ZIP: 313
  Title: Reduce Conventional Transaction Fee to 1000 zatoshis
  Owners: Aditya Bharadwaj <nighthawkwallet@protonmail.com>
  Credits: Daira-Emma Hopwood
           Deirdre Connolly
           Nathan Wilcox
  Status: Obsolete
  Obsoleted-By: 317
  Category: Wallet
  Created: 2020-10-11
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zip-reduce-default-shielded-transaction-fee-to-1000-zats/37566>
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/408>


Terminology
===========

The key words "SHOULD" and "RECOMMENDED" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they
appear in all capitals.

The term "conventional transaction fee" in this document is in reference
to the value of a transaction fee that is conventionally used by wallets,
and that a user can reasonably expect miners on the Zcash network to accept
for including a transaction in a block.


Abstract
========

The goal of this ZIP is to gather wallet developers, miners & Zcash users
for social consensus on reducing the conventional transaction fees and
to get the Zcash conventional transaction fee reduced from 10,000 zatoshis
to 1,000 zatoshis.

In addition, this specification harmonizes transaction fees between different
kinds of transaction (involving shielded addresses, transparent addresses, or
both), as proposed in [#zcash-2942]_.

.. warning::
    This ZIP has been obsoleted by ZIP 317 [#zip-0317]_. In particular,
    transactions using the 1,000-zatoshi fee specified in this ZIP will be
    treated as having no "paid actions", and therefore will be deprioritized
    by the RECOMMENDED block template construction algorithm in ZIP 317.
    If they have more than 50 logical actions, they will never be included
    by that algorithm, and so will not appear in block templates created by
    `zcashd` or `zebrad` with the default parameters. They will also incur
    the low fee penalty specified in ZIP 401 [#zip-0401]_, which will make
    them more likely to be evicted from the mempool without being mined.

    Wallets SHOULD move to using ZIP 317 fees with all due haste.


Motivation
==========

The conventional transaction fee presently is 0.0001 ZEC or 10,000 zatoshis.
At a ZEC market price of USD 100, for example, a user can send 10,000
transactions for 1 ZEC. This works out to 1 U.S. cent per transaction and
it rises with any increase in the price of ZEC.

With increase in light wallet adoptions on mobile clients, many users will
be new to the Zcash eco-system. And the fact that the transaction fees are
paid by the sender (not the receiver) is new information to users who might
use Zcash for e-commerce and app interactions that might result in several
transactions each day.

Privacy must not cost a premium. The cost of 10 shielded transactions
buys 1GB of mobile data `in India today <https://www.cable.co.uk/mobiles/worldwide-data-pricing/>`_.

Zcash users must be able to do more with their ZEC balance than worry about
paying the premium for shielded transactions.

With reduced fees, it will be cheaper to transact on the Zcash network,
while also inviting novel use cases for privacy-preserving applications
that would benefit from the privacy, security, and programmable money
aspects of the Zcash chain.

The harmonization of fees between different kinds of transaction can be
expected to improve usability, consistency, and predictability.

Requirements for adoption
-------------------------

The change to the conventional transaction fees should be undertaken soon
as it gets difficult to gain consensus with the growth in the network
of wallets, exchanges, miners and third parties involved.

The following parties need to be part of the consensus:

* Support from mining groups is required to include the lowered conventional
  fee transactions in the next block.
* Wallet developers need to provide commitment to update the software to use
  the new fee.
* Zcash documentation and community outreach must be undertaken to make the
  change known.


Security and privacy considerations
-----------------------------------

Unique transaction fees may reveal specific users or wallets or wallet versions,
which would reduce privacy for those specific users and the rest of the network.
Hence this change should be accepted by a majority of shielded transaction
software providers before deploying the change.

Varying/unique fees are bad for privacy. For the short term before blocks get
full, it is fine for everyone to use a constant fee, as long as it is enough to
compensate miners for including the transaction. [#nathan-1]_

Long term, the issue of fees needs to be re-visited in separate future
proposals as the blocks start getting consistently full. New ZIPs with
flexible fees, such as [#ian-1]_, along with scaling solutions, will need
to be evaluated and applied.

Denial of Service Vulnerability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A transaction-rate-based denial of service attack occurs when an attacker
generates enough transactions over a window of time to prevent legitimate
transactions from being mined, or to hinder syncing blocks for full nodes
or miners.

There are two primary protections to this kind of attack in Zcash: the
block size limit, and transaction fees. The block size limit ensures that
full nodes and miners can keep up with the block chain even if blocks are
completely full. However, users sending legitimate transactions may not
have their transactions confirmed in a timely manner.

Variable fees could mitigate this kind of denial of service: if there are
more transactions available than can fit into a single block, then a miner
will typically choose the transactions that pay the highest fees. If
legitimate wallets were to increase their fees during this condition, the
attacker would also increase the fees of their transactions. It is
sometimes argued that this would impose a cost to the attacker that would
limit the time window for which they can continue the attack. However, there
is little evidence that the actual costs involved would be a sufficient
disincentive.

This proposal does not alter how fees are paid from transactions to miners.
However, it does establish a fixed flat fee that wallets are expected to
use. Therefore during a transaction rate denial-of-service attack, legitimate
fees from those wallets will not rise, so an attacker can extend an attack
for a longer window for the same cost.

This ZIP does not address this concern. A future ZIP should address this issue.
Wallet developers and operators should monitor the Zcash network for rapid
growth in transaction rates.


Specification
=============

Wallets implementing this specification will use a default fee of 0.00001 ZEC
(1000 zatoshis) from block 1,080,000, for all transactions.


Transaction relaying
--------------------

zcashd, and potentially other node implementations, implements fee-based
restrictions on relaying of mempool transactions. Nodes that normally relay
transactions are expected to do so for transactions that pay at least the
conventional fee, unless there are other reasons not to do so for robustness
or denial-of-service mitigation.

In zcashd 4.2.0, this change is implemented by [#zcash-relaying]_.


Mempool size limiting
---------------------

zcashd limits the size of the mempool as described in [#zip-0401]_. This
specifies a *low\_fee\_penalty* that is added to the "eviction weight" if the
transaction pays a fee less than (in the original ZIP) 10,000 zatoshis. This
threshold is modified to match the new conventional fee in zcashd 4.2.0.


Support
=======

The developers of the following wallets intend to implement the reduced fees:

* Zbay;
* Zecwallet Suite (Zecwallet Lite for Desktop/iOS/Android & Zecwallet FullNode);
* Nighthawk Wallet for Android & iOS;
* zcashd built-in wallet [#zcash-4916]_.

In zcashd this fee change is implemented in version 4.2.0 (not dependent on
block height), and in that version is limited to transactions created using
`z_*` RPC APIs. It is planned to extend this to all transactions in a future
version [#zcash-2942]_.


Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Nathan Wilcox for suggesting improvements to the denial of service
section. Thanks to Daira-Emma Hopwood and Deirdre Connolly for reviewing and fixing
the wording in this ZIP.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#nathan-1] `Conventional Shielded Fees <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zip-reduce-default-shielded-transaction-fee-to-1000-zats/37566/40>`_
.. [#ian-1] `Ian Miers. Mechanism for fee suggester/oracle <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zip-reduce-default-shielded-transaction-fee-to-1000-zats/37566/31>`_
.. [#zooko-1] `Zooko Wilcox. Tweet on reducing tx fees <https://twitter.com/zooko/status/1295032258282156034?s=20>`_
.. [#zooko-2] `Zooko Wilcox. Tweet on sharing tx fee with wallet developer <https://twitter.com/zooko/status/1295032621294956545?s=20>`_
.. [#zcash-4916] `Reduce default fee to 1000 zatoshis <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/4916>`_
.. [#zcash-2942] `Ecosystem-wide standard transaction fee <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/2942>`_
.. [#zcash-relaying] `zcashd commit e6a44ff: Always allow transactions paying at least DEFAULT_FEE to be relayed <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/4916/commits/e6a44ff833bce280a30115d10ef0070ad4d52b38>`_
.. [#zip-0317] `ZIP 317: Proportional Transfer Fee Mechanism <zip-0317.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0401] `ZIP 401: Addressing Mempool Denial-of-Service <zip-0401.rst>`_
