::

  ZIP: 252
  Title: Deployment of the NU5 Network Upgrade
  Owners: teor <teor@zfnd.org>
          Daira Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
  Status: Proposed
  Category: Consensus / Network
  Created: 2021-02-23
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/440>
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/446>


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST" and "SHOULD" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in
ZIP 200. [#zip-0200]_

The terms "Testnet" and "Mainnet" are to be interpreted as described in
section 3.11 of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-networks]_.


Abstract
========

This proposal defines the deployment of the NU5 network upgrade.


Specification
=============

NU5 deployment
-----------------

The primary sources of information about NU5 consensus protocol changes are:

- The Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol]_
- ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism [#zip-0200]_
- ZIP 216: Require Canonical Point Encodings [#zip-0216]_
- ZIP 221: FlyClient - Consensus-Layer Changes [#zip-0221]_ (amended)
- ZIP 224: Orchard Shielded Protocol [#zip-0224]_
- ZIP 225: Version 5 Transaction Format [#zip-0225]_
- ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability [#zip-0244]_
- The Orchard Book [#orchard-book]_
- The halo2 Book [#halo2-book]_

The network handshake and peer management mechanisms defined in ZIP 201 [#zip-0201]_
also apply to this upgrade.


The following network upgrade constants [#zip-0200]_ are defined for the NU5
upgrade:

CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID
  ``0xF919A198``


ACTIVATION_HEIGHT (NU5)
  Testnet: TODO

  Mainnet: TODO


MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU5)
  Testnet: 170014

  Mainnet: 170015


For each network (testnet and mainnet), nodes compatible with NU5 activation
on that network MUST advertise a network protocol version that is greater than
or equal to that network's MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU5).

For each network, pre-NU5 nodes are defined as nodes advertising a protocol
version less than that network's MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU5).

Once NU5 activates on testnet or mainnet, NU5 nodes SHOULD take steps to:

- reject new connections from pre-NU5 nodes on that network;
- disconnect any existing connections to pre-NU5 nodes on that network.


Backward compatibility
======================

Prior to the network upgrade activating on each network, NU5 and pre-NU5
nodes are compatible and can connect to each other.

Once the network upgrades, even though pre-NU5 nodes can still accept the
numerically larger protocol version used by NU5 as being valid, NU5 nodes
will always disconnect peers using lower protocol versions.

Unlike Blossom, Heartwood, and Canopy, and like Overwinter and Sapling, NU5
defines a new transaction version. Therefore, NU5 transactions MAY be in
the new v5 format specified by [#zip-0225]_. Unlike previous transaction
version updates, the existing v4 transaction format remains valid after
NU5 activation. Both transaction formats MUST be accepted by NU5 nodes.


Support in zcashd
=================

**TODO: Update as needed**

Support for NU5 on testnet will be implemented in ``zcashd`` version 4.4.0, which
will advertise protocol version 170014. Support for NU5 on mainnet will be implemented
in ``zcashd`` version 5.0.0, which will advertise protocol version 170015.


Backward compatibility in zcashd
--------------------------------

The minimum peer protocol version that NU5-compatible ``zcashd`` nodes will connect to
is 170002.


NU5 deployment for zcashd
-------------------------

For each network, approximately 1.5 days (defined in terms of
block height) before the corresponding NU5 activation height, nodes compatible
with NU5 activation on that network will change the behaviour of their peer
connection logic in order to prefer pre-NU5 peers on that network for eviction
from the set of peer connections::

    /**
     * The period before a network upgrade activates, where connections to upgrading peers are preferred (in blocks).
     * This was three days for upgrades up to and including Blossom, and is 1.5 days from Heartwood onward.
     */
    static const int NETWORK_UPGRADE_PEER_PREFERENCE_BLOCK_PERIOD = 1728;

The implementation is similar to that for Overwinter which was described in
[#zip-0201]_.

However, NU5 nodes will have a preference for connecting to other NU5 nodes, so
pre-NU5 nodes will gradually be disconnected in the run up to activation.

Support in Zebra
================

**TODO: Update as needed**

Support for NU5 on testnet will be implemented in Zebra version 1.0.0, which
will advertise protocol version 170014. Support for NU5 on mainnet will be implemented
in Zebra version 2.0.0, which will advertise protocol version 170015.


Backward compatibility in Zebra
-------------------------------

The minimum peer protocol version that NU5-compatible Zebra nodes will connect to
is 170002. However, Zebra will immediately disconnect from nodes with a protocol
version less than:

- 170012 on testnet, or
- 170013 on mainnet.

NU5 deployment for Zebra
------------------------

For each network, at the corresponding NU5 activation height, nodes compatible
with NU5 activation on that network will close any new connections with pre-NU5
peers.

Since Zebra maintains a reasonably strict internal request-response protocol,
pre-NU5 nodes will gradually be disconnected after activation. (Nodes are
temporarily disconnected if they send gossip or chain sync hints outside the
strict request-response sequence that Zebra expects.)


References
==========

.. [#RFC2119] `RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.1.24 or later <protocol/nu5.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-networks] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.1.24 [NU5 proposal]. Section 3.11: Mainnet and Testnet <protocol/nu5.pdf#networks>`_
.. [#protocol-txnencodingandconsensus] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2021.1.24 [NU5 proposal]. Section 7.1: Transaction Encoding and Consensus <protocol/nu5.pdf#txnencodingandconsensus>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Activation Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0201] `ZIP 201: Network Peer Management for Overwinter <zip-0201.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0216] `ZIP 216: Require Canonical Point Encodings <zip-0216.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0221] `ZIP 221: FlyClient - Consensus-Layer Changes <zip-0221.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0224] `ZIP 224: Orchard Shielded Protocol <zip-0224.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0225] `ZIP 225: Version 5 Transaction Format <zip-0225.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0244] `ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability <zip-0244.rst>`_
.. [#orchard-book] `The Orchard Book <https://zcash.github.io/orchard/>`_
.. [#halo2-book] `The halo2 Book <https://zcash.github.io/halo2/>`_
