::

  ZIP: 1008
  Title: Fund ECC for Two More Years
  Owners: @kek (zcash forums)
          @mistfpga (zcash forums) <steve@mistfpga.net>
  Status: Obsolete
  Category: Consensus Process
  Created: 2019-09-02
  License: CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>
  Discussions-To: <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/kek-s-proposal-fund-ecc-for-2-more-years/34778>


Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST" and "MUST NOT" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they appear in all capitals.

For clarity this ZIP defines these terms:

* Spirit is defined as what is the intended outcome of the ZIP. [#spirit]_

.. [#spirit] If there is contradiction between Spirit and any other part of
   the proposal that needs to be addressed, in the event it is not addressed
   Spirit is assumed to overrule all.


Out of Scope for this Proposal
==============================

Everything except moving the development fund end date.


Abstract
========

The spirit of this proposal is to keep to the current structure of the
Electric Coin Company (ECC) receiving funding from the block distribution for
two years' worth of blocks after the first halving in October 2020.


Motivation
==========

To give more time to work out the full ramifications of any potential pivot /
slow down, yet keep "all in on ZEC" for two more years with as little
disruption as possible.


Requirements
============

.. role:: editor-note

Nothing about distribution recipients changes.

:editor-note:`The current distribution of the Founders’ Reward is dependent
on arrangements between the participants that will, if not explicitly renewed,
expire at the first halving. There are currently direct and indirect recipients
other than the ECC and Zcash Foundation. It is unclear whether funding of the
ECC and Foundation is intended to continue at the current absolute ZEC rate,
or at the same rate relative to the block subsidy which halves in October 2020.
Further specification would be needed in order to fulfil and clarify the spirit
of the proposal.`


Specification
=============

* The ECC's portion of block subsidy MUST be 20%, until a block height
  corresponding to two years after the first halving, i.e. until October 2022.
* A to-be-specified fraction of ECC's portion SHOULD be used to fund the
  Zcash Foundation.

:editor-note:`A previous version of this ZIP stated the following requirements:
"The ECC's portion of block subsidy MUST be capped at their projected 1.1m USD
costs a month." and "The ECC's portion of block subsidy MUST NOT be greater than
10% of total block subsidy of any one block." These requirements were mistakenly
introduced in the process of ZIP editing; they do not reflect the intent of the
original author @kek. They are also inconsistent with the summary that was posted
in the Community Sentiment Collection Poll blog post at
<https://www.zfnd.org/blog/community-sentiment-collection-poll/>, which stated an
ECC percentage of 20%. Votes on the Community Sentiment Collection Poll, the
Community Advisory Panel Helios poll, and/or the stake-weighted petition reported
at <https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/staked-poll-on-zcash-dev-fund-debate/34846/71>,
should be interpreted with care in light of this ambiguity. Also note that the
1.1m USD cap could not in any case be specified as a consensus rule since there
is no on-chain oracle for the USD price.`

Rationale
---------

Provisions that referred to specific block heights have been revised since they
were inconsistent with the change in block target spacing [#zip-0208]_ that will
occur with the Blossom Network Upgrade [#zip-0206]_; and even if recalculated,
fixed block heights would potentially be inconsistent with future changes in
target block spacing.


Raised objections and issues so far
===================================

* This is just kicking the can down the road.
* The Zcash Foundation has raised objections to a single point of failure in the
  ECC.


Implications to other users
===========================

* The knock-on impact of this ZIP to exchanges and wallet developers may be
  nontrivial.
* The economics of doing this have not been calculated.


References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#zip-0206] `ZIP 206: Deployment of the Blossom Network Upgrade <zip-0206.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0208] `ZIP 208: Shorter Block Target Spacing <zip-0208.rst>`_
