::

  ZIP: 216
  Title: Require Canonical Jubjub Point Encodings
  Owners: Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
          Daira Emma Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
  Status: Final
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2021-02-11
  License: MIT
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/400>


Terminology
===========

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
[#RFC2119]_

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in
ZIP 200. [#zip-0200]_

The terms "settled" and "full validator" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [#protocol-blockchain]_.

The terms "Mainnet" and "Testnet" in this document are to be interpreted as described
in [#protocol-networks]_.


Abstract
========

This ZIP fixes an oversight in the implementation of the Sapling consensus rules, by
rejecting all non-canonical representations of Jubjub points.


Motivation
==========

The Sapling specification was originally written with the intent that all values, including
Jubjub points, are strongly typed with canonical representations. [#protocol-jubjub]_ This
has significant advantages for security analysis, because it allows the protocol to be
modelled with just the abstract types.

The intention of the Jubjub implementation (both in the `jubjub` crate [#jubjub-crate]_
and its prior implementations) was to ensure that only canonical point encodings would be
accepted by the decoding logic. However, an oversight in the implementation allowed an
edge case to slip through: for each point on the curve where the :math:`u\!`-coordinate is
zero, there are two encodings that will be accepted:

.. code-block:: rust

   // Fix the sign of `u` if necessary
   let flip_sign = Choice::from((u.to_bytes()[0] ^ sign) & 1);
   let u_negated = -u;
   let final_u = Fq::conditional_select(&u, &u_negated, flip_sign);

This code accepts either sign bit, because ``u_negated == u``.

There are two points on the Jubjub curve with :math:`u\!`-coordinate zero:

- :math:`(0, 1)\!`, which is the identity;
- :math:`(0, -1)\!`, which is a point of order two.

Each of these has a single non-canonical encoding in which the value of the sign bit is
:math:`1\!`.

This creates a consensus issue because (unlike other non-canonical point encodings that
are rejected) either of the above encodings can be decoded, and then re-encoded to a
*different* encoding. For example, if a non-canonical encoding appeared in a transaction
field, then node implementations that store points internally as abstract curve points,
and used those to derive transaction IDs, would derive different IDs than nodes which
store transactions as bytes (such as `zcashd`).

This issue is not known to cause any security vulnerability, beyond the risk of
consensus incompatibility. In fact, for some of the fields that would otherwise be
affected, the issue does not occur because there are already consensus rules that
prohibit small-order points, and this incidentally prohibits non-canonical encodings.

Adjustments to the protocol specification were made in versions 2020.1.8, 2020.1.9,
2020.1.15, and 2021.1.17 to match the `zcashd` implementation. (The fact that this
required 4 specification revisions to get right, conclusively demonstrates the problem.)


Specification
=============

Let :math:`\mathsf{abst}_{\mathbb{J}}\!`, :math:`\mathsf{repr}_{\mathbb{J}}\!`, and
:math:`q_{\mathbb{J}}` be as defined in [#protocol-jubjub]_.

Define a non-canonical compressed encoding of a Jubjub point to be a sequence of
:math:`256` bits, :math:`b\!`, such that :math:`\mathsf{abst}_{\mathbb{J}}(b) \neq \bot`
and :math:`\mathsf{repr_{\mathbb{J}}}\big(\mathsf{abst}_{\mathbb{J}}(b)\big) \neq b\!`.

Non-normative note: There are two such bit sequences,
:math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{\ell_{\mathbb{J}}}(2^{255} + 1)` and
:math:`\mathsf{I2LEOSP}_{\ell_{\mathbb{J}}}(2^{255} + q_{\mathbb{J}} - 1)\!`.
The Sapling protocol uses little-endian ordering when converting between bit and
byte sequences, so the first of these sequences corresponds to a :math:`\mathtt{0x01}`
byte, followed by :math:`30` zero bytes, and then a :math:`\mathtt{0x80}` byte.

Once this ZIP activates, the following places within the Sapling consensus protocol
where Jubjub points occur MUST reject non-canonical Jubjub point encodings.

In Sapling Spend descriptions [#protocol-spenddesc]_:

  - the :math:`\underline{R}` component (i.e. the first :math:`32` bytes) of the
    :math:`\mathtt{spendAuthSig}` RedDSA signature.

In transactions [#protocol-txnencoding]_:

  - the :math:`\underline{R}` component (i.e. the first :math:`32` bytes) of the
    :math:`\mathtt{bindingSigSapling}` RedDSA signature.

In the plaintext obtained by decrypting the :math:`\mathsf{C^{out}}` field of a
Sapling transmitted note ciphertext [#protocol-decryptovk]_:

  - :math:`\mathsf{pk}\star_{\mathsf{d}}\!`.

(This affects decryption of :math:`\mathsf{C^{out}}` in all cases, but is
consensus-critical only in the case of a shielded coinbase output.
[#protocol-txnconsensus]_)

There are some additional fields in the consensus protocol that encode Jubjub points,
but where non-canonical encodings MUST already be rejected as a side-effect of
existing consensus rules.

In Sapling Spend descriptions:

  - :math:`\mathtt{cv}`
  - :math:`\mathtt{rk}\!`.

In Sapling Output descriptions [#protocol-outputdesc]_:

  - :math:`\mathtt{cv}`
  - :math:`\mathtt{ephemeralKey}\!`.

These fields cannot by consensus contain small-order points. All of the points
with non-canonical encodings are small-order.

Implementations MAY choose to reject non-canonical encodings of the above four
fields early in decoding of a transaction. This eliminates the risk that parts
of the transaction could be re-serialized from their internal representation to a
different byte sequence than in the original transaction, e.g. when calculating
transaction IDs.

In addition, Sapling addresses and full viewing keys MUST be considered invalid when
imported if they contain non-canonical Jubjub point encodings, or encodings of points
that are not in the prime-order subgroup :math:`\mathbb{J}^{(r)}\!`. These requirements
\MAY be enforced in advance of NU5 activation.

In Sapling addresses [#protocol-saplingpaymentaddrencoding]_:

  - the encoding of :math:`\mathsf{pk_d}\!`.

In Sapling full viewing keys [#protocol-saplingfullviewingkeyencoding]_ and extended
full viewing keys [#zip-0032-extfvk]_:

  - the encoding of :math:`\mathsf{ak}`
  - the encoding of :math:`\mathsf{nk}\!`.

:math:`\mathsf{pk_d}` and :math:`\mathsf{ak}` also MUST NOT encode the zero point
:math:`\mathcal{O}_{\mathbb{J}}\!`.

(Some versions of the Zcash protocol specification mistakenly allowed :math:`\mathsf{pk_d}`
to be the zero point. This was corrected in version 2023.4.0 [#protocol-2023.4.0]_
[#zips-issue664]_ to match the implementation in librustzcash as of [#librustzcash-pr109]_,
which has been used in `zcashd` since `zcashd` v2.1.2.)

The above is intended to be a complete list of the places where compressed encodings
of Jubjub points occur in the Zcash consensus protocol and in plaintext, address, or
key formats.

Retroactive applicability
-------------------------

As originally specified, this ZIP required that the new validity rules be applied only
after NU5 activation. This was necessary because a transaction containing a non-canonical
Jubjub point encoding could have been included in any block before NU5 activation.

However, now that NU5 is a settled upgrade on the Zcash Mainnet and Testnet chains
[#protocol-blockchain]_ [#protocol-networks]_, it can be observed that there were no such
non-canonical encodings in publically visible transaction fields before the Mainnet and
Testnet NU5 activations. Therefore, a full validator MAY enforce the above specification
retroactively.

It remains possible that there could be non-canonical :math:`\mathsf{pk}\star_{\mathsf{d}}`
encodings in plaintexts obtained by decrypting the :math:`\mathsf{C^{out}}` field of a
Sapling transmitted note ciphertext. Such encodings MUST be rejected by the decryption
procedure in [#protocol-decryptovk]_ after NU5 activation. An implementation MAY also
reject them before NU5 activation. Doing so cannot lead to loss of funds sent to a Sapling
address that has been correctly generated as specified in [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents]_,
because such an address cannot have :math:`\mathsf{ivk} = 0\!`, which is the only case in
which :math:`\mathsf{pk}\star_{\mathsf{d}}` could be non-canonical.

Note: There are no such non-canonical :math:`\mathsf{pk}\star_{\mathsf{d}}` encodings in
the :math:`\mathsf{C^{out}}` components of shielded coinbase outputs (which are required
by consensus to be decryptable by an all-zero :math:`\mathsf{ovk}` [#protocol-txnconsensus]_).


Rationale
=========

Zcash previously had a similar issue with non-canonical representations of points in
Ed25519 public keys and signatures. In that case, given the prevalence of Ed25519
signatures in the wider ecosystem, the decision was made in ZIP 215 [#zip-0215]_ (which
activated with the Canopy network upgrade [#zip-0251]_) to allow non-canonical
representations of points.

In Sapling, we are motivated instead to reject these non-canonical points:

- The chance of the identity occurring anywhere within the Sapling components of
  transactions from implementations following the standard protocol is cryptographically
  negligible.
- This re-enables the aforementioned simpler security analysis of the Sapling protocol.
- The Jubjub curve has a vastly-smaller scope of usage in the general cryptographic
  ecosystem than Curve25519 and Ed25519.

The necessary checks are very simple and do not require cryptographic operations,
therefore the performance impact will be negligible.

The public inputs of Jubjub points to the Spend circuit (:math:`\mathsf{rk}` and
:math:`\mathsf{cv^{old}}`) and Output circuit (:math:`\mathsf{cv^{new}}` and
:math:`\mathsf{epk}`) are not affected because they are represented in affine
coordinates as elements of the correct field
(:math:`\mathbb{F}_{r_\mathbb{S}} = \mathbb{F}_{q_\mathbb{J}}`),
and so no issue of encoding canonicity arises.

Encodings of elliptic curve points on Curve25519, BN-254 :math:`\mathbb{G}_1\!`,
BN-254 :math:`\mathbb{G}_2\!`, BLS12-381 :math:`\mathbb{G}_1\!`, and
BLS12-381 :math:`\mathbb{G}_2` are not affected.

Encodings of elliptic curve points on the Pallas and Vesta curves in the NU5 proposal
[#protocol-pallasandvesta]_ are also not affected.


Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This ZIP eliminates a potential source of consensus divergence between differing full node
implementations. As of February 2023, no known divergence of this type exists for any
production implementation of Zcash, but an early alpha version of the `zebrad` node
implementation would have been susceptible to this issue.


Deployment
==========

This ZIP activated with Network Upgrade 5. Requirements on points encoded in payment
addresses and full viewing keys MAY be enforced in advance of NU5 activation.

`zcashd` PRs #6000 [#zcashd-pr6000]_ and #6399 [#zcashd-pr6399]_ retroactively enforce
canonical encoding of Jubjub points for the entire chain history, as described in the
`Retroactive applicability`_ section.


References
==========

.. [#RFC2119] `RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html>`_
.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0 or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-blockchain] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 3.3: The Block Chain <protocol/protocol.pdf#blockchain>`_
.. [#protocol-networks] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 3.3: Mainnet and Testnet <protocol/protocol.pdf#networks>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingkeycomponents] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 4.2.2: Sapling Key Components <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingkeycomponents>`_
.. [#protocol-spenddesc] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 4.4: Spend Descriptions <protocol/protocol.pdf#spenddesc>`_
.. [#protocol-outputdesc] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 4.5: Output Descriptions <protocol/protocol.pdf#outputdesc>`_
.. [#protocol-decryptovk] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 4.19.3 Decryption using a Full Viewing Key (Sapling and Orchard) <protocol/protocol.pdf#decryptovk>`_
.. [#protocol-jubjub] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 5.4.9.3: Jubjub <protocol/protocol.pdf#jubjub>`_
.. [#protocol-pallasandvesta] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 5.4.9.6: Pallas and Vesta <protocol/protocol.pdf#pallasandvesta>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingpaymentaddrencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 5.6.3.1: Sapling Payment Addresses <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingpaymentaddrencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingfullviewingkeyencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 5.6.3.3: Sapling Full Viewing Keys <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingfullviewingkeyencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-txnencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 7.1: Transaction Encoding and Consensus <protocol/protocol.pdf#txnencoding>`_
.. [#protocol-txnconsensus] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 7.1.2: Transaction Consensus Rules <protocol/protocol.pdf#txnconsensus>`_
.. [#protocol-2023.4.0] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2023.4.0. Section 10: Change History — 2023.4.0 <protocol/protocol.pdf#2023.4.0>`_
.. [#zip-0032-extfvk] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets. Sapling extended full viewing keys <zip-0032.rst#sapling-extended-full-viewing-keys>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0215] `ZIP 215: Explicitly Defining and Modifying Ed25519 Validation Rules <zip-0215.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0251] `ZIP 251: Deployment of the Canopy Network Upgrade <zip-0251.rst>`_
.. [#jubjub-crate] `jubjub Rust crate <https://github.com/zkcrypto/jubjub>`_
.. [#zcashd-pr6000] `zcash/zcash PR 6000: Enable ZIP 216 for blocks prior to NU5 activation <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/6000>`_
.. [#zcashd-pr6399] `zcash/zcash PR 6399: Retroactively enable ZIP 216 before NU5 activation <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/pull/6399>`_
.. [#librustzcash-pr109] `zcash/librustzcash PR 109: PaymentAddress encapsulation <https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/pull/109/files#diff-92d6b429f317a74bd65b2ad87d4f841e9fa9e334edab4199cdaba91172cd2d10R147-R151>`_
.. [#zips-issue664] `zcash/zips issue 664: `Sapling pk\_d should not allow the zero point <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/664>`_
