::

  ZIP: 310
  Title: Security Properties of Sapling Viewing Keys
  Owners: Daira-Emma Hopwood <daira-emma@electriccoin.co>
          Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
  Status: Draft
  Category: Informational
  Created: 2020-03-09
  License: MIT


Terminology
===========

Sapling FVK
    A Sapling full viewing key as described in [#protocol]_, or a Sapling
    extended full viewing key as described in [#zip-0032]_.
GUARANTEED
    Information that can be learned by the holder of a Sapling FVK, and
    ensured to be correct by the Sapling protocol, given the cryptographic
    assumptions underlying that protocol.
UNVERIFIED
    Information that can be learned by the holder of a Sapling FVK, but
    that is not guaranteed to be correct.
UNDEFINED
    The Sapling protocol does not define whether or not this information is
    accessible.
UNREVEALED
    Information that is not revealed as a consequence of holding a Sapling
    FVK.

Abstract
========

This ZIP documents what information an entity learns when they are given
one or more Sapling viewing keys, and what guarantees they have about this
information.


Motivation
==========

Shielded addresses allow for network participants to send and receive while
revealing as little information on the public block chain as possible.
However, there are circumstances in which it is desirable to explicitly
reveal some of this information to a third party, such as during auditing
or for splitting authority between multiple parties or devices.

It is important that a party that is relying on the information made visible
by a viewing key, understands what that information conveys and what
assumptions they can make when relying on it.


Security Properties
===================

Alice has a spending key that she has been using for receiving and sending ZEC.
She generates a Sapling FVK and gives it to Ian. What can Ian learn with the
Sapling FVK, and what guarantees does he have about the things he learns?
(Note for below: IVK and OVK are derived from FVK.)

If Ian is given some diversified payment address:

* [GUARANTEED] He can determine whether the IVK derived from FVK corresponds
  to the address.
* [UNVERIFIED] He cannot reliably determine whether the OVK derived from FVK
  corresponds to the address.

  * That is, Ian could have been given an alleged FVK that is “correct” for a
    particular address, but with an arbitrary OVK that corresponds to some
    other address, or no address, or a well-known OVK (e.g. all-zeros which is
    used for funding streams / coinbase outputs).

If Ian is given two diversified payment addresses:

* [GUARANTEED] He can determine whether or not both of these addresses are
  linked to the given FVK, and if so, that they are linked to each other.


What Ian learns about a single transaction
------------------------------------------

If Ian detects a new transaction (defined as a transaction that Ian had no
prior knowledge about) solely by decrypting one of its Output descriptions
with Alice’s IVK, then he learns:

* [GUARANTEED] Whether Alice is a recipient of the payment (by verifying the
  note commitment against the encrypted contents).

  * [GUARANTEED] If so, to which of Alice’s diversified payment addresses the
    payment was sent.
  * [UNDEFINED] Whether Alice is an explicit recipient, or just receiving
    change or making a movement between “accounts” (the protocol does not
    distinguish between Bob sending Alice funds, and Alice moving funds
    between different addresses).

* [GUARANTEED] A new, unspent note that Alice is able to spend.
* [GUARANTEED] The nullifier with which to detect the new note being spent,
  once this transaction is mined in a block.

  * This is a way in which Sapling viewing keys differ from Sprout; you do not
    learn this information for Sprout viewing keys.

* [UNVERIFIED] The memo field contents, which might identify the sender.

  * If the memo contained explicit sender authentication / proof-of-spending-key,
    then Ian gains a guarantee; FVK does not require this.

If Ian detects a new transaction by observing a nullifier for one of Alice’s
unspent known notes, then he learns:

* [GUARANTEED] Alice is a sender.
* [GUARANTEED] Whether Alice is the sole sender, or has collaborated to create
  the transaction (if there are other Spend descriptions with unknown
  nullifiers).
* [UNREVEALED] The identities of the other senders (as in this context Ian only
  has Alice’s FVK).
* [UNDEFINED] The recipient(s).

  * Nothing in the transaction enforces that outputs are encrypted to either the
    address of the note that is committed to, or any value known to the sender.

* [UNDEFINED] Whether Alice receives any funds in the transaction.

  * The protocol does not distinguish between Alice sending all funds to a
    third party, and moving funds to a different address that she controls.

If Ian can decrypt an output in the same transaction with Alice’s IVK, then he
additionally learns:

* [GUARANTEED] Alice receives change from the transaction (by the definition
  that “change” is funds that you receive in a transaction where you also spend
  funds).

If Ian can decrypt an output in the same transaction with Alice’s OVK (which
he will be able to do if Alice follows standard protocol), then he additionally
learns:

* [GUARANTEED] The recipient’s diversified payment address (by verifying the
  note commitment).
* [GUARANTEED] The amount sent to the recipient.
* [GUARANTEED] The memo that the recipient will receive by decrypting the
  output.
* [UNREVEALED] The nullifier with which the recipient would spend the note (as
  Ian does not have the recipient’s FVK).

If Ian detects a new transaction solely by decrypting one of its Output
descriptions with Alice’s OVK (and not via any of the nullifiers in its Spend
descriptions), then he learns:

* [GUARANTEED] The sender had knowledge of Alice’s OVK (negligible probability
  of random chance, as OVK is 256 bits).
* [UNVERIFIED] Alice might be the sender.
* [UNVERIFIED] This is a non-standard transaction. There may be a bug in the
  wallet generating transactions, or the transaction might be generated as an
  out-of-band transaction.

  * The behaviour of the zcashd wallet is to use the OVK corresponding to the
    first address (i.e. first call to the transaction builder) being spent
    from.


What Ian learns about balances
------------------------------

This section concerns what Ian learns contextually across multiple
transactions.

We define a “tally” to be the abstraction of balance corresponding to an FVK.
This corresponds to exactly one expanded spending key. (Balances cannot
accurately be modelled as being associated with a diversified address, since
there are multiple diversified addresses associated with an FVK.)

The balance of a tally after a particular block is defined as the sum of note
values that are spendable, according to the Sapling protocol, using the
extended spending key associated with the tally, in a block chain that extends
from that block.

Ian can attempt to keep track of a given tally’s balance as of a given block.
This would be done as follows:

* Scan the chain from Sapling activation up to and including the specified
  block, collecting all of the Sapling spends and Sapling outputs up to and
  including that block that are relevant to the FVK, as specified in section
  4.19 of the Protocol Specification [#protocol-saplingscan]_. This produces
  a ReceivedSet of notes that were received by that tally, and a SpentSet of
  notes that were spent from it.

* Compute the balance as the sum of the values of all notes appearing in
  ReceivedSet but not in SpentSet.

The following inaccuracies may occur in balance accounting:

* An incoming payment to the tally may not be detected, if the sender
  transmitted it and the recipient accepted it “out of band”, without
  following the Sapling protocol.
* If an incoming payment is not detected for the above reason, and the note
  is later spent, then that spend will also not be detected by the process
  in section 4.19.

The combination of the above inaccuracies can cause a tally’s computed
balance to be lower than its actual balance. They cannot cause a tally’s
computed balance to be higher than its actual balance. That is:

* [GUARANTEED] Ian learns a lower bound on the balance of the tally.
* [UNVERIFIED] If Alice followed the Sapling protocol when receiving funds
  to addresses associated with the tally, then Ian learns the exact balance
  of the tally.

It should be noted that since “out-of-band” payments require cooperation
between the sender and recipient in not following the Sapling protocol, the
sender and recipient could instead have agreed to use a different tally.


What Ian learns about the ecosystem
-----------------------------------

Assume Ian now has access to a set S of FVKs. Without loss of generality we
will treat these as belonging to independent entities.

Ian runs the transaction and balance scanning protocols described in previous
sections, in parallel for all FVKs in S.

In addition to information learned from each individual FVK, Ian can infer:

* [GUARANTEED] When any member of the set sends funds to any other member of
  the set via any standard transaction.

  * [UNDEFINED] Ian may not learn about out-of-band transactions, but this has
    a similar effect to transactions between entities with FVKs not in the set.

* [GUARANTEED] Any common recipients (with payment addresses that are not
  controlled by any members of the set) that have received funds from two or
  more members of the set via standard transactions.

  * [UNVERIFIED] Any common recipients that have received funds from two or
    more members of the set via non-standard transactions where OVKs from the
    set members were used to encrypt recipient outputs.
  * [UNDEFINED] Ian might not see the full set of common recipients, if members
    of the set cooperate with recipients to create out-of-band transactions.

* [GUARANTEED] Any subsets of set members that cooperatively spend funds (for
  which Ian has knowledge of the individual spends) within the same
  transaction.

  * [UNDEFINED] Ian may learn about cooperative spends involving members of the
    set by detecting the use of multiple OVKs from set members within a single
    transaction, even if the transactions are not made according to the Sapling
    protocol.


References
==========

.. [#protocol] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15 or later <protocol/protocol.pdf>`_
.. [#protocol-saplingscan] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2020.1.15. Section 4.19: Block Chain Scanning (Sapling) <protocol/protocol.pdf#saplingscan>`_
.. [#zip-0032] `ZIP 32: Shielded Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets <zip-0032.rst>`_
